.\" Copyright (c) 1993 by Mike Sample and UBC
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\" $Header: /cvs/Darwin/src/live/Security/SecuritySNACCRuntime/doc/mkchdr.1,v 1.1.1.1 2001/05/18 23:14:10 mb Exp $
.\" $Log: mkchdr.1,v $
.\" Revision 1.1.1.1  2001/05/18 23:14:10  mb
.\" Move from private repository to open source repository
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1.1.1  1999/03/16 18:05:53  aram
.\" Originals from SMIME Free Library.
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1997/01/01 22:47:18  rj
.\" first check-in
.\"
.TH MKCHDR 1 "11 July 1993"
.SH NAME
mkchdr \- creates a C header file from a type table
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
mkchdr <tbl-file> [output-file]
.SH DESCRIPTION
mkchdr will generate a C header file from the given type table.  The C
data structures will be written to the given output file.  If an
output file is not given, the C header is written to stdout.

The generated C data structure is the value representation that table
driven encoder expects (and decoder returns) for the type definitions
in the given type table.  The table driven encoder and decoder, etc.
routines do not use the generated header - they treat the data in a
generic way.  The generated header file simply saves you the hassle of
dealing with ASN.1 values in the same generic way.  Instead you get
properly named structs and field names.  You do not need to use mkchdr
to use the table driven encoders etc. but it is recommended.
.PP
.\" there is a tab between the file name and the description
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 28
.B snacc/tbl-tools/mkchdr/
Source code for the mkchdr program
.PD
.SH BUGS
There is no means of customizing the generated data structure.
.SH COPYING
Copyright (c) 1993 Mike Sample and the University of British Columbia
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Mike Sample <msample@cs.ubc.ca>, University of British Columbia
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was made possible by grants from the Canadian Institute for
Telecommunications Research (CITR) and Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
