.\" Copyright (c) 1993 by Mike Sample and UBC
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\" $Header: /cvs/Darwin/src/live/Security/SecuritySNACCRuntime/doc/ptbl.1,v 1.1.1.1 2001/05/18 23:14:10 mb Exp $
.\" $Log: ptbl.1,v $
.\" Revision 1.1.1.1  2001/05/18 23:14:10  mb
.\" Move from private repository to open source repository
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1.1.1  1999/03/16 18:05:54  aram
.\" Originals from SMIME Free Library.
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1997/01/01 22:47:19  rj
.\" first check-in
.\"
.TH PTBL 1 "11 July 1993"
.SH NAME
ptbl \- print a type table
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
ptbl [\-a] <tbl-file>
.SH DESCRIPTION

ptbl prints the give type table to stdout.  It will print it in one of
two formats: internal style and ASN.1 stlye.  The internal style shows
the contents of the type table data structure in ASN.1 value notation.
You will need to look at the tbl.asn1 file to understand the internal
form.  The ASN.1 form attempts to re-create the ASN.1 that generated
the given type table.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-a
Print the table in ASN.1 style (recommended)
.PP
.\" there is a tab between the file name and the description
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 28
.B snacc/tbl-tools/ptbl/
Source code for the ptbl program
.B snacc/asn1specs/tbl.asn1
ASN.1 definition for the type table data structure
.PD
.SH BUGS
ptbl does not attempt to print the IMPORTs information even though it
is possible with a bit of work.
.SH COPYING
Copyright (c) 1993 Mike Sample and the University of British Columbia
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Mike Sample <msample@cs.ubc.ca>, University of British Columbia
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was made possible by grants from the Canadian Institute for
Telecommunications Research (CITR) and Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
