.\" Copyright (c) 1993 by Mike Sample and UBC
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\" $Header: /cvs/Darwin/src/live/Security/SecuritySNACCRuntime/doc/pval.1,v 1.1.1.1 2001/05/18 23:14:10 mb Exp $
.\" $Log: pval.1,v $
.\" Revision 1.1.1.1  2001/05/18 23:14:10  mb
.\" Move from private repository to open source repository
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1.1.1  1999/03/16 18:05:54  aram
.\" Originals from SMIME Free Library.
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1997/01/01 22:47:20  rj
.\" first check-in
.\"
.TH PVAL 1 "11 July 1993"
.SH NAME
pval \- print BER values in ASN.1 value notation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
pval \-T <tt file name> [\-m <module name>] \-n <type name>
             <BER value file list>
.SH DESCRIPTION
pval prints the given BER values in their value notation.  You must
specify the type name and optionally the module name of the type in
the given BER files.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-T " file\c
Use the type table in the file to look for the named types definition.
.TP
.BI "\-m " modulename\c
Specifies the module in which the named type is defined.  If the
module name is not specified with this option, pval looks for the
first occurence of the named type in the modules in the given type
table.
.TP
.BI "\-n " typename\c
Specifies the type of the values in the given BER files.  If you
give the wrong type name, decoding errors will occur.
.PP
.\" there is a tab between the file name and the description
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 28
.B snacc/tbl-tools/pval/
Source code for the pval program
.SH COPYING
Copyright (c) 1993 Mike Sample and the University of British Columbia
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Mike Sample <msample@cs.ubc.ca>, University of British Columbia
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was made possible by grants from the Canadian Institute for
Telecommunications Research (CITR) and Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
