.TH TLSMGR 8 
.ad
.fi
.SH NAME
tlsmgr
\-
Postfix TLS session cache and PRNG handling manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.na
.nf
\fBtlsmgr\fR [generic Postfix daemon options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.ad
.fi
The tlsmgr process does housekeeping on the session cache database
files. It runs through the databases and removes expired entries
and entries written by older (incompatible) versions.

The tlsmgr is responsible for the PRNG handling. The used internal
OpenSSL PRNG has a pool size of 8192 bits (= 1024 bytes). The pool
is initially seeded at startup from an external source (EGD or
/dev/urandom) and additional seed is obtained later during program
run at a configurable period. The exact time of seed query is
using random information and is equally distributed in the range of
[0-\fBtls_random_reseed_period\fR] with a \fBtls_random_reseed_period\fR
having a default of 1 hour.

Tlsmgr can be run chrooted and with dropped privileges, as it will
connect to the entropy source at startup.

The PRNG is additionally seeded internally by the data found in the
session cache and timevalues.

Tlsmgr reads the old value of the exchange file at startup to keep
entropy already collected during previous runs.

From the PRNG random pool a cryptographically strong 1024 byte random
sequence is written into the PRNG exchange file. The file is updated
periodically with the time changing randomly from
[0-\fBtls_random_prng_update_period\fR].
.SH STANDARDS
.na
.nf
.SH SECURITY
.na
.nf
.ad
.fi
Tlsmgr is not security-sensitive. It only deals with external data
to be fed into the PRNG, the contents is never trusted. The session
cache housekeeping will only remove entries if expired and will never
touch the contents of the cached data.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.ad
.fi
Problems and transactions are logged to the syslog daemon.
.SH BUGS
.ad
.fi
There is no automatic means to limit the number of entries in the
session caches and/or the size of the session cache files.
.SH CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS
.na
.nf
.ad
.fi
The following \fBmain.cf\fR parameters are especially relevant to
this program. See the Postfix \fBmain.cf\fR file for syntax details
and for default values. Use the \fBpostfix reload\fR command after
a configuration change.
.SH Session Cache
.ad
.fi
.IP \fBsmtpd_tls_session_cache_database\fR
Name of the SDBM file (type sdbm:) containing the SMTP server session
cache. If the file does not exist, it is created.
.IP \fBsmtpd_tls_session_cache_timeout\fR
Expiry time of SMTP server session cache entries in seconds. Entries
older than this are removed from the session cache. A cleanup-run is
performed periodically every \fBsmtpd_tls_session_cache_timeout\fR
seconds. Default is 3600 (= 1 hour).
.IP \fBsmtp_tls_session_cache_database\fR
Name of the SDBM file (type sdbm:) containing the SMTP client session
cache. If the file does not exist, it is created.
.IP \fBsmtp_tls_session_cache_timeout\fR
Expiry time of SMTP client session cache entries in seconds. Entries
older than this are removed from the session cache. A cleanup-run is
performed periodically every \fBsmtp_tls_session_cache_timeout\fR
seconds. Default is 3600 (= 1 hour).
.SH Pseudo Random Number Generator
.ad
.fi
.IP \fBtls_random_source\fR
Name of the EGD socket or device or regular file to obtain entropy
from. The type of entropy source must be specified by preceding the
name with the appropriate type: egd:/path/to/egd_socket,
dev:/path/to/devicefile, or /path/to/regular/file.
tlsmgr opens \fBtls_random_source\fR and tries to read
\fBtls_random_bytes\fR from it.
.IP \fBtls_random_bytes\fR
Number of bytes to be read from \fBtls_random_source\fR.
Default value is 32 bytes. If using EGD, a maximum of 255 bytes is read.
.IP \fBtls_random_exchange_name\fR
Name of the file written by tlsmgr and read by smtp and smtpd at
startup. The length is 1024 bytes. Default value is
/etc/postfix/prng_exch.
.IP \fBtls_random_reseed_period\fR
Time in seconds until the next reseed from external sources is due.
This is the maximum value. The actual point in time is calculated
with a random factor equally distributed between 0 and this maximum
value. Default is 3600 (= 60 minutes).
.IP \fBtls_random_prng_update_period\fR
Time in seconds until the PRNG exchange file is updated with new
pseude random values. This is the maximum value. The actual point
in time is calculated with a random factor equally distributed
between 0 and this maximum value. Default is 60 (= 1 minute).
.SH SEE ALSO
.na
.nf
smtp(8) SMTP client
smtpd(8) SMTP server
.SH LICENSE
.na
.nf
.ad
.fi
The Secure Mailer license must be distributed with this software.
.SH AUTHOR(S)
.na
.nf
