.\""Copyright (c) 2001 Apple Computer, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
.\"The contents of this file constitute Original Code as defined in and are 
.\"subject to the Apple Public Source License Version 1.2 (the 'License'). 
.\"You may not use this file except in compliance with the
.\"License. Please obtain a copy of the License at 
.\"http://www.apple.com/publicsource and read it before using this file.
.\"
.\"This Original Code and all software distributed under the License are 
.\"distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER 
.\"EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE
.\"HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\"WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE,
.\"QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT. Please see the License for the 
.\"specific language governing rights and limitations under the License."
.Dd February 14, 2001
.Dt "update_prebinding" 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm update_prebinding
.Nd Update prebinding information when new system libraries or frameworks are installed
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl root Ar directory
.Op Fl force
.Op Fl debug
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm update_prebinding
ensures that prebinding information is up-to-date after new versions
of system libraries are installed.  Prebinding information is
pre-calculated address information for libraries used by a given
library.  By pre-determining where a function in another library is
destined to be placed, the dynamic linker does not have to resolve
symbols at application startup time, and the application can launch
faster.
.Pp
Because each recompilation of a library may place functions at
different addresses, a newly installed library's prebinding
information might not match the libraries already on the disk.  When
the dynamic linker determines that prebinding information for a
library could be invalid, it defaults to resolving all the names for
that library, and for all libraries referenced by that library, losing
any advantage of having the prebinding information.
.Pp
The
.Ar -root
option specifies the directory tree to search for changed files.
This is usually the root directory.  update_prebinding will look for
dependent libraries within this directory hierarchy, but will not go
to different file systems.  The argument allows you to update
prebinding information for a specific file to match a non-running
version of the operating system on another partition.
update_prebinding uses the root to find the system libraries for that
version of the OS.  The
.Ar root
argument is not intended to limit update_prebinding's effect to a
particular set of libraries.  By default, update_prebinding only
changes a file if the prebinding is out of date.
.Pp
The
.Ar -force
option ensures that all files examined are re-prebound, even if the
prebinding is otherwise up-to-date.  The command update_prebinding
-root / -force will prebind all binaries on the root volume, even if
otherwise correct.
.Pp
The
.Ar -debug
option prints out additional information while the
prebinding is being updated.
.Sh Issues
update_prebinding only work on libraries that have been compiled and
linked with the prebinding information added.  Applications still gain
the benefits of prebinding as long as the system libraries used by the
application have been correctly prebound.
.Pp
Updating prebinding for a given library can fail if any of its
dependent libraries are invalid -- not prebound, expected load address
conflicting with other loaded libraries, or missing architecture in a
fat library.  To test if an application is able to use prebinding
information, set the environment variable DYLD_PREBIND_DEBUG.  (See
.Xr dyld 1
for details on this option.)
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dyld 1
