.TH XvSelectPortNotify 3X __vendorversion__
.\" $XFree86: xc/doc/man/Xv/XvSelectPortNotify.man,v 1.6 2001/08/17 13:27:50 dawes Exp $
.SH Name
XvSelectPortNotify \- enable or disable XvPortNotify(3X) events
.\"
.SH Syntax
.B #include <X11/extensions/Xvlib.h>
.sp 1l
\fBXvSelectPortNotify(\fIdpy, port, onoff\fR)
.sp 1l
\fBDisplay \fI*dpy\fR;
.br
\fBXvPortID \fIport\fR;
.br
\fBBool \fIonoff\fR;
.\"
.SH Arguments
.\"
.IP \fIdpy\fR 8
Specifies the display screen on which the
X Server is to accept requests from X clients.  If the
display option is not specified, X uses the display screen
specified by your DISPLAY environment variable.  The display
option has the format hostname:number.  Using two colons
(::) instead of one (:) indicates that DECnet is to be used
for transport.
.IP \fIport\fR 8
Specifies the port for which PortNotify events are to be generated
when its attributes are changed using XvSetPortAttribute(3X).
.IP \fIonoff\fR 8
Specifies whether notification is to be enabled or disabled.
.\"
.SH Description
.\"
XvSelectPortNotify(3X) enables or disables PortNotify event
delivery to the requesting client.  XvPortNotify(3X) events are
generated when port attributes are changed using XvSetPortAttribute(3X).
.\"
.SH Returned Values
.IP [Success] 8
Returned if XvSelectPortNotify(3X) completed successfully.
.IP [XvBadExtension] 8
Returned if the Xv extension is unavailable.
.IP [XvBadAlloc] 8
Returned if XvSelectPortNotify(3X) failed to allocate memory to process
the request.
.SH Diagnostics
.IP [XvBadPort] 8
Generated if the requested port does not exist.
.SH See Also
.\"
XvSetPortNotify(3X), XvSetPortAttribute(3X), XvPortNotify(3X)
.br
