.\"
.\" $XFree86: xc/lib/apple/AppleWM.man,v 1.2 2003/09/16 00:36:08 torrey Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Apple Computer, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Torrey T. Lyons. All Rights Reserved.
.\" 
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
.\" distribute, sub license, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
.\" permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
.\" the following conditions:
.\" 
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice (including the
.\" next paragraph) shall be included in all copies or substantial portions
.\" of the Software.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL PRECISION INSIGHT AND/OR ITS SUPPLIERS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
.\" TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
.\" SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.\"
.de TQ
.br
.ns
.TP \\$1
..
.TH APPLEWM 3 "Version 1.0" "XFree86"

.SH NAME
 AppleWM \- Apple rootless window management extension.
.SH SYNTAX
\&#include <X11/extensions/applewm.h>
.nf    
.sp
Bool XAppleWMQueryExtension \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP, 
        int *\fIevent_basep\fP, int *\fIerror_basep\fP\^);
.sp
Status XAppleWMQueryVersion \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP,
        int *\fImajor_versionp\fP, int *\fIminor_versionp\fP\^);
.sp
Bool XAppleWMDisableUpdate \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP, int \fIscreen\fP\^);
.sp
Bool XAppleWMReenableUpdate \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP, int \fIscreen\fP\^);
.sp
Bool XAppleWMSelectInput \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP, unsigned long \fImask\fP\^);
.sp
Bool XAppleWMSetWindowMenu \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP, int \fInitems\fP,
        const char **\fIitems\fP\^);
.sp
Bool XAppleWMSetWindowMenuWithShortcuts \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP,
        int \fInitems\fP, const char **\fIitems\fP,
        const char *\fIshortcuts\fP\^);
.sp
Bool XAppleWMSetWindowMenuCheck \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP, int \fIindex\fP\^);
.sp
Bool XAppleWMSetFrontProcess \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP\^);
.sp
Bool XAppleWMSetWindowLevel \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP, Window \fIwindow\fP,
        int \fIlevel\fP\^);
.sp
Bool XAppleWMSetCanQuit \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP, Bool \fIstate\fP\^);
.sp
Bool XAppleWMFrameGetRect \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP,
        unsigned int \fIframe_class\fP,
        unsigned int \fIframe_rect\fP,
        short \fIinner_x\fP, short \fIinner_y\fP,
        short \fIinner_w\fP, short \fIinner_h\fP,
        short \fIouter_x\fP, short \fIouter_y\fP,
        short \fIouter_w\fP, short \fIouter_h\fP,
        short *\fIret_x\fP, short *\fIret_y\fP,
        short *\fIret_w\fP, short *\fIret_h\fP\^);
.sp
unsigned int XAppleWMFrameHitTest \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP,
        unsigned int \fIframe_class\fP,
        short \fIpoint_x\fP, short \fIpoint_y\fP,
        short \fIinner_x\fP, short \fIinner_y\fP,
        short \fIinner_w\fP, short \fIinner_h\fP,
        short \fIouter_x\fP, short \fIouter_y\fP,
        short \fIouter_w\fP, short \fIouter_h\fP\^);
.sp
Bool XAppleWMFrameDraw \^(\^Display *\fIdpy\fP, int \fIscreen\fP,
        Window \fIwindow\fP,
        unsigned int \fIframe_class\fP,
        unsigned int \fIframe_attr\fP,
        short \fIinner_x\fP, short \fIinner_y\fP,
        short \fIinner_w\fP, short \fIinner_h\fP,
        short \fIouter_x\fP, short \fIouter_y\fP,
        short \fIouter_w\fP, short \fIouter_h\fP,
        unsigned int \fItitle_length\fP,
        const unsigned char *\fItitle_bytes\fP);
.fi
.SH ARGUMENTS
.IP \fIdpy\fP 1i
Specifies the connection to the X server.
.IP \fIscreen\fP 1i
Specifies which screen.
.IP \fImask\fP 1i
Mask of event types the client is interested in.
.IP \fIwindow\fP 1i
Specifies which window.
.IP \fIlevel\fP 1i
Specifies the window level.
.IP \fIframe_class\fP 1i
Specifies the class of window frame decoration.
.IP \fIframe_rect\fP 1i
Specifies which rectangle to return from the window frame decoration.
.IP \fIframe_attr\fP 1i
A mask specifying the attributes of the window frame decoration.
.IP \fIinner_x\fP,\fIinner_y\fP,\fIinner_w\fP,\fIinner_h\fP 1i
Rectangle of the window content inside the window frame decoration.
.IP \fIouter_x\fP,\fIouter_y\fP,\fIouter_w\fP,\fIouter_h\fP 1i
Rectangle of the outer border of the window frame decoration.
.IP \fIpoint_x\fP,\fIpoint_y\fP 1i
Specifies the coordinates of the mouse up event.

.SH DATATYPES

.PP
.B Events
.nf
typedef struct {
    int type;               \/* of event *\/
    unsigned long serial;   \/* # of last request processed by server *\/
    Bool send_event;        \/* true if came from a SendEvent request *\/
    Display *display;       \/* Display the event was read from *\/
    Window window;          \/* window of event *\/
    Time time;              \/* server timestamp when event happened *\/
    int kind;               \/* subtype of event *\/
    int arg;
} XAppleWMNotifyEvent;
.fi
.B XAppleWMNotifyEvent
is sent to a client who has requested notification of AppleWM events with
\fBXAppleWMSelectInput\fP.

.PP
Event types:
.nf
\&#define AppleWMControllerNotify               0
\&#define AppleWMActivationNotify               1
\&#define AppleWMPasteboardNotify               2
.fi
.PP
Event masks:
.nf
\&#define AppleWMControllerNotifyMask           (1L << 0)
\&#define AppleWMActivationNotifyMask           (1L << 1)
\&#define AppleWMPasteboardNotifyMask           (1L << 2)
.fi
.PP
Kinds of ControllerNotify events:
.nf
\&#define AppleWMMinimizeWindow                 0
\&#define AppleWMZoomWindow                     1
\&#define AppleWMCloseWindow                    2
\&#define AppleWMBringAllToFront                3
\&#define AppleWMHideWindow                     4
\&#define AppleWMHideAll                        5
\&#define AppleWMShowAll                        6
\&#define AppleWMWindowMenuItem                 9
\&#define AppleWMWindowMenuNotify               10
\&#define AppleWMNextWindow                     11
\&#define AppleWMPreviousWindow                 12
.fi
.PP
Kinds of ActivationNotify events:
.nf
\&#define AppleWMIsActive                       0
\&#define AppleWMIsInactive                     1
.fi
.PP
Kinds of PasteboardNotify events:
.nf
\&#define AppleWMCopyToPasteboard               0
.sp
.fi
.PP
.B Window Parameters
.PP
Window level ids for \fBXAppleWMSetWindowLevel\fP:
.nf
\&#define AppleWMWindowLevelNormal              0
\&#define AppleWMWindowLevelFloating            1
\&#define AppleWMWindowLevelTornOff             2
\&#define AppleWMWindowLevelDock                3
\&#define AppleWMWindowLevelDesktop             4
\&#define AppleWMNumWindowLevels                5
.fi
.PP
Values for \fIframe_rect\fP argument to \fBXAppleWMFrameGetRect\fP:
.nf
\&#define AppleWMFrameRectTitleBar              1
\&#define AppleWMFrameRectTracking              2
\&#define AppleWMFrameRectGrowBox               3
.fi
.PP
Window frame classes:
.nf
\&#define AppleWMFrameClassDocument             1 << 0
\&#define AppleWMFrameClassDialog               1 << 1
\&#define AppleWMFrameClassModalDialog          1 << 2
\&#define AppleWMFrameClassSystemModalDialog    1 << 3
\&#define AppleWMFrameClassUtility              1 << 4
\&#define AppleWMFrameClassToolbar              1 << 5
\&#define AppleWMFrameClassMenu                 1 << 6
\&#define AppleWMFrameClassSplash               1 << 7
\&#define AppleWMFrameClassBorderless           1 << 8
.fi
.PP
Window frame attributes:
.nf
\&#define AppleWMFrameActive                    0x0001
\&#define AppleWMFrameUrgent                    0x0002
\&#define AppleWMFrameTitle                     0x0004
\&#define AppleWMFramePrelight                  0x0008
\&#define AppleWMFrameShaded                    0x0010
\&#define AppleWMFrameCloseBox                  0x0100
\&#define AppleWMFrameCollapseBox               0x0200
\&#define AppleWMFrameZoomBox                   0x0400
\&#define AppleWMFrameAnyBox                    0x0700
\&#define AppleWMFrameCloseBoxClicked           0x0800
\&#define AppleWMFrameCollapseBoxClicked        0x1000
\&#define AppleWMFrameZoomBoxClicked            0x2000
\&#define AppleWMFrameAnyBoxClicked             0x3800
\&#define AppleWMFrameGrowBox                   0x4000
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B AppleWM
is a simple library designed to interface with the Apple-WM extension.
This extension allows X window managers to better interact with
the Mac OS X Aqua user interface when running X11 in a rootless mode.
.PP
A more complete description will be forthcoming eventually.

.SH FUNCTIONS
.B XAppleWMDisableUpdate
causes any updates to the windows on the screen to be queued until updates
are reenabled with \fBXAppleWMReenableUpdate\fP. This is useful to avoid
intermediate redraws to the screen if a number of changes are going to be
made at once. Updates should only be disabled temporarily while drawing
to a window. These calls may be nested and each call to
\fBXAppleWMDisableUpdate\fP must be paired with a subsequent call to
\fBXAppleWMReenableUpdate\fP. Updating is not reenabled until the last
unnested call to \fBXAppleWMReenableUpdate\fP. Disabling updates applies
to window content; however, it is implementation dependent whether window
size and position changes are disabled as well.
.PP
.B XAppleWMSelectInput
is used to request that a client receive notification of the
.B AppleWM
events listed above. The event mask specifies the event types the client is
interested in receiving. Passing an event mask of 0 stops notification of
events.
.PP
.B XAppleWMSetWindowMenu
and
.B XAppleWMSetWindowMenuWithShortcuts
set the list of windows displayed in the X server's "Window" menu in the
Aqua menu bar. Other items may be listed in this menu by the X server, but
a part of this menu is set aside for use by the Apple-WM extension. This
is intended to be used to set a list of important top-level X11 windows.
.PP
One item of the X server's "Window" menu can have a checkmark beside it to
indicate it is the active or front most window.
.B XAppleWMSetWindowMenuCheck
can be used to set the item number to put a checkmark beside.
.PP
.B XAppleWMSetFrontProcess
directs the X server to make itself the front most application among all
the other Mac OS X applications. This causes X11 windows to move above
other applications' windows and for the X server to start receiving
keyboard and mouse events.
.PP
Windows can be placed into different Aqua window levels with
\fBXAppleWMSetWindowLevel\fP. The stacking of window levels takes precedence
over the stacking of windows within a level. Thus the bottom window in a level
will obscure even the top most window of a lower window level. By default all
windows are placed in the lowest window level, AppleWMWindowLevelNormal. When
a window is moved to a new level, it is ordered in front of all of its peers
at the new level. \fINote, X11 does not have the concept of window levels and
this function does not change the X11 window order. The result of trying to
reorder an X11 window above another window of higher level is undefined.
This should probably be changed.\fP
.PP
By default, the X server will ask for confirmation whenever the user requests
that it quit from the Aqua UI.
.B XAppleWMSetCanQuit
can be used to change this behavior. If a \fIstate\fP of TRUE is passed, the
X server will quit without confirmation when requested. If FALSE is passed,
the default behavior is used.
.PP
.B XAppleWMFrameDraw
can be used to decorate a top-level window with the standard Aqua window
frame and widgets. The \fIframe_class\fP controls the overall look of the
window frame and \fIframe_attr\fP specifies the details of how the various
UI elements should be drawn. The dimensions of the X11 window content are
passed as the \fIinner_*\fP rectangle and the dimensions of the Aqua window
frame are passed as the \fIouter_*\fP rectangle.
.B XAppleWMFrameGetRect
is used to calculate the size of the outer rectangle from the size of the
window content, which is being reparented.
.PP
.B XAppleWMFrameGetRect
returns a rectangle that encloses an element of the window frame decoration.
The \fIframe_rect\fP argument specifies the element of interest. The
\fIinner_*\fP and \fIouter_*\fP rectangles (as described above) specify the
window geometry. If AppleWMFrameRectTitleBar is passed for \fIframe_rect\fP,
the \fIinner_*\fP parameters are ignored. The returned rectangle has the
dimensions of the \fIouter_*\fP rectangle except that its height is equal
to the constant title bar height for the specified \fIframe_class\fP. The
proper outer rectangle for a given window content size is the union of inner
rectangle and the title bar rectangle. The AppleWMFrameRectTracking and
AppleWMFrameRectGrowBox rectangles are primarily intended to be used by the
window manager to determine the correct placement for child windows to
receive events. The tracking rectangle is the area of the window containing
the close, collapse and zoom boxes. Typically when the cursor is over this
area, the window manager will highlight the close, collapse, and zoom
buttons to conform to the standard Aqua interface.
.PP
If a mouse up or down event is received in the tracking rectangle,
.B XAppleWMFrameHitTest
is used to determine which button was clicked.
.B XAppleWMFrameHitTest
returns AppleWMFrameCloseBox, AppleWMFrameCollapseBox, or AppleWMFrameZoomBox
to indicate which button was clicked. If no button was clicked, 0 will be
returned.
.PP
Other functions include: \fBXAppleWMQueryExtension\fP, which returns the event
and error base codes and \fBXAppleWMQueryVersion\fP, which returns the current
version of the extension. (This information is cached by the library.)

.SH RESTRICTIONS
.B AppleWM
is only intended to be used on Mac OS X when running a rootless X server.
