\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@c $Id: gimpprint.texi,v 1.1.1.1 2003/01/27 19:05:31 jlovell Exp $
@setfilename gimpprint.info
@settitle GIMP-Print
@finalout
@c @exampleindent 0
@c For double-sided printing, uncomment:
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@c Combine several related indices
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp vr

@c Include version numbers
@include version.texi

@c Macro definitions
@set BUGADDR @email{gimp-print-devel@@lists.sourceforge.net}
@set MAILLIST @email{gimp-print-devel@@lists.sourceforge.net}

@dircategory Libraries
@direntry
* GIMP-Print: (gimpprint).      print plugin for the GIMP, and printing library
@end direntry

@ifinfo
This file documents the gimpprint library and associated programs
used for high quality printing.

Copyright (C) 2001 Michael Sweet (@email{mike@@easysw.com}) and Robert
Krawitz (@email{rlk@@alum.mit.edu})

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title GIMP-Print
@subtitle The print plugin for the GIMP
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author The GIMP-Print Project

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2001  Michael Sweet
(@email{mike@@easysw.com}) and Robert Krawitz (@email{rlk@@alum.mit.edu})

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage


@c Print tables of contents
@shortcontents
@contents

@ifnottex
@c All the nodes can be updated using the EMACS command
@c texinfo-every-node-update, which is normally bound to C-c C-u C-e.
@node Top,  , (dir), (dir)
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@top The print plugin for the GIMP and printing library

This file documents the libgimpprint library and associated programs used
for high quality printing. This edition documents version @value{VERSION}.

@xref{Problems}, for information on how to report problems with
GIMP-Print.
@end ifnottex

@c All the menus can be updated with the EMACS command
@c texinfo-all-menus-update, which is normally bound to C-c C-u C-a.
@menu
* Instructions::                How to read this manual.
* Copying::                     Your rights.
* Overview::                    Preliminary information.
* Using libgimpprint::          Examples of how to use libgimpprint.
* Integrating libgimpprint::    Using libgimpprint in your own packages.
* Functions::                   libgimpprint function reference.
* Programs::                    Using GIMP-Print programs.
* Problems::                    Reporting bugs.
* Appendices::                  Additional information.
* Data Type and Variable Index::  Index of data types and variables.
* Function and Macro Index::    Index of functions and macros.
* Concept Index::               Index of concepts.
@end menu

@include introduction.texi
@include copying.texi
@include overview.texi
@include using.texi
@include integrating.texi
@include functions.texi
@include programs.texi
@include problems.texi
@include appendices.texi
@include indices.texi

@bye
