@node Instructions, Copying, Top, Top
@unnumbered Preface

@cindex reading
@cindex manual, how to read
@cindex how to read
This manual documents the use of the GIMP-Print package, focusing mainly on the
libgimpprint library that is the core of GIMP-Print. Parts of the manual which
describe the use of libgimpprint are aimed primarily at programmers, and do
assume that the reader is familiar with C programming, and using standard
programming tools on GNU or UNIX systems. Other parts of the manual document
the use of the programs that make up the GIMP-Print package, and assume no
knowledge other than the basics of using a shell and editor.

The best way to learn how to use libgimpprint in your own programs is to read
the manual from start to finish, using the examples given in the text to learn
how it works. The bulk of the manual can be used as a reference once one
understands the basics.

The manual is split into several parts for the programmer.  It starts
with a simple usage example of how to link a program with libgimpprint,
then how to integrate this into package build scripts, using
@command{make}, @command{autoconf} and @command{automake}.  This is
followed by a detailed function reference, including descriptions of all
the data types used.

For the end-user, there is a section on all of the programs that come
with GIMP-Print, including the GIMP @command{print} plugin, and the CUPS
and Ghostscript drivers.

The appendices at the end of the manual detail the dither and weave
algorithms used in libgimpprint, the ESC/P2 printer control language
used in Epson printers and how to add support for a new printer to
libgimpprint.

@sp 2
@center We hope you enjoy using GIMP-Print!
@center ---The GIMP-Print project
