.\" Copyright (c) 2004, Apple Computer, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd Jan 24, 2004
.Dt AUDIT_USER 5
.Os "Mac OS X"
.Sh NAME
.Nm audit_user
.Nd specifies events to be audited for the given users
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm 
file specifies which audit event classes are to be audited for the given users.
If specified, these flags are combined with the system-wide audit flags in the
audit_control file to determine which classes of events to audit for that user.
These settings take effect when the user logs in.
.Pp
Each line maps a user name to a list of classes that should be audited and a list of classes that should not be audited. 
Entries are of the form username:alwaysaudit:neveraudit, where alwaysaudit
is a set of event classes that are always audited, and neveraudit
is a set of event classes that should not be audited.  These sets can indicate
the inclusion or exclusion of multiple classes, and whether to audit successful
or failed events.  See
.Xr audit_control 5
for more information about audit flags.
.Pp
Example entries in this file are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
root:lo,ad:no
jdoe:-fc,ad:+fw
.Ed
.Pp
These settings would cause login and administrative events that succeed on
behalf of user root to be audited.  No failure events are audited.  For the
user jdoe, failed file creation events are audited, administrative events are
audited, and successful file write events are never audited.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/security/audit_user" -compact
.It Pa /etc/security/audit_user
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audit_control 5
