.\" Copyright (c) 2004, Apple Computer, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd Jan 24, 2004
.Dt AUDIT_CONTROL 5
.Os "Mac OS X"
.Sh NAME
.Nm audit_control
.Nd contains audit system parameters
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm 
file contains several audit system parameters.  Each line of this file is of
the form parameter:value.  The parameters are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Nm dir
The directory where audit log files are stored.  There may be more than one of
these entries.  Changes to this entry can only be enacted by restarting the
audit system.  See
.Xr audit 1
for a description of how to restart the audit system.
.It Nm flags
Specifies which audit event classes are audited for all users.  
.Xr audit_user 5
describes how to audit events for individual users.  See the
information below for the format of the audit flags.
.It Nm naflags
Contains the audit flags that define what classes of events are audited when
an action cannot be attributed to a specific user.
.It Nm minfree
The minimum free space required on the file system audit logs are being written to.  When the free space falls below this limit a warning will be issued.  Not
currently used as the value of 20 percent is chosen by the kernel.
.El
.Sh AUDIT FLAGS
Audit flags are a comma delimited list of audit classes as defined in the
audit_class file.  (See
.Xr audit_class 5
for details.)  Event classes may be preceded by a prefix which changes their
interpretation.  The following prefixes may be used for each class:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact -offset indent
.It +
Record successful events
.It -
Record failed events
.It ^
Record both successful and failed events
.It ^+
Don't record successful events
.It ^-
Don't record failed events
.El
.Sh DEFAULT
The following settings appear in the default
.Nm
file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dir:/var/audit
flags:lo,ad,-all,^-fc,^-cl
minfree:20
naflags:lo
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Nm flags
parameter above specifies the system-wide mask corresponding to login/logout
events, administrative events, and all failures except for failures in creating
or closing files.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/security/audit_control" -compact
.It Pa /etc/security/audit_control
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audit 1 ,
.Xr auditd 8 ,
.Xr audit_class 5 ,
.Xr audit_user 5
