.\" Copyright (c) 2004, Apple Computer, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd Jan 24, 2004
.Dt PRAUDIT 1
.Os "Mac OS X"
.Sh NAME
.Nm praudit
.Nd print the contents of audit trail files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm praudit
.Op Fl lrs
.Op Fl d Ar del
.Op Ar file ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm 
utility prints the contents of the audit trail files to the standard output  in
human-readable form.  If no filename is specified, the standard input is used
by default.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl l
Prints the entire record on the same line.  If this option is not specified,
every token is displayed on a different line.
.It Fl r
Prints the records in their raw, numeric form.  This option is exclusive from 
.Fl s
.It Fl s
Prints the tokens in their short form.  Short text representations for
record and event type are displayed.  This option is exclusive from
.Fl  r
.It Fl d Ar del
Specifies the delimeter.  The default delimeter is the comma.
.El
.Pp
If the raw or short forms are not specified, the default is to print the tokens
in their long form.  Events are displayed as per their descriptions given in
/etc/security/audit_event; uids and gids are expanded to their names; and dates and times are displayed in human-readible format.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/security/audit_control" -compact
.It Pa /etc/security/audit_class
Descriptions of audit event classes
.It Pa /etc/security/audit_event
Descriptions of audit events
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audit_class 5 ,
.Xr audit_event 5
