.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH AMAVISD 8 Ammavisd-new
.\" 
.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2000 Carnegie Mellon University.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This is amavisd-new.
.\" It is a high-performance interface between message transfer agent (MTA)
.\" and virus scanners and/or spam scanners.
.\"
.\" It is a performance-enhanced and feature-enriched version of amavisd
.\" (which in turn is a daemonized version of AMaViS), initially based
.\" on amavisd-snapshot-20020300).
.\"
.\" All work since amavisd-snapshot-20020300:
.\"   Copyright (C) 2002  Mark Martinec,  All Rights Reserved.
.\" with contributions from the amavis-* mailing lists and individuals,
.\" as acknowledged in the release notes.
.\"
.\"    This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"    the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"    (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"    GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"    along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\"    Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
.\"
.\" Author: Mark Martinec <mark.martinec@ijs.si>
.\" Patches and problem reports are welcome.
.\"
.\" The latest version of this program is available at:
.\"   http://www.ijs.si/software/amavisd/
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.\" Here is a boilerplate from the amavisd(-snapshot) version,
.\" which is the version that served as a base code for the initial
.\" version of amavisd-new. License terms were the same:
.\"
.\"   Author:  Chris Mason <cmason@unixzone.com>
.\"   Current maintainer: Lars Hecking <lhecking@users.sourceforge.net>
.\"   Based on work by:
.\"         Mogens Kjaer, Carlsberg Laboratory, <mk@crc.dk>
.\"         Juergen Quade, Softing GmbH, <quade@softing.com>
.\"         Christian Bricart <shiva@aachalon.de>
.\"   This script is part of the AMaViS package.  For more information see:
.\"     http://amavis.org/
.\"   Copyright (C) 2000 - 2002 the people mentioned above
.\"   This software is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL)
.\"   See:  http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" 
.\" $Id: amavisd.8,v 1.1 2004/05/13 21:20:25 dasenbro Exp $
.SH NAME
amavisd \- Amavisd-new daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B amavisd
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Amavisd
is set up to act as a mini-SMTP server.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI " Debug"
Debug option.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B N/A
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
\fB\fR
