.TH distcc 1 "2 July 2002"
.SH NAME
distcc \- distributed C/C++ compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B distcc gcc 
.I [OPTIONS] 
.RI -o\  OBJECT\  -c\  SOURCE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I distcc
allows compilation of C code to be distributed across several machines
on a network.  distcc should always generate the same results as a
local compile, is simple to install and use, and is often
significantly faster than a local compile.
.PP
Unlike other distributed build systems, 
.I distcc 
distcc does not require all machines to share a filesystem, or to have
the same libraries or header files installed.  
.I distcc
sends the complete preprocessed source code across the network for
each job.
.PP
Compilation is centrally controlled by a 
.I client
machine, which is
typically the developer's workstation or laptop.  The 
.I distcc
client runs on this machine, as does \fImake\fP, the preprocessor, the
linker, and other stages of the build process.  Any number of
.I "volunteer" 
machines help the client to build the program, by running
the C compiler and assembler as required.  The volunteer machines run
the 
.I distccd
daemon which listens on a network socket for connections.
.PP
For a brief summary of usage, type 
.PP
.I distcc --help
.PP
See the User Manual (available as HTML, Info, PS and PDF) for much
more information.  The manual and other documentation is available
from
.I http://distcc.samba.org/
.SH CREDITS
distcc was inspired by Andrew Tridgell's ccache program.
.SH AUTHOR
distcc was written by Martin Pool <http://sourcefrog.net/mbp/>
.SH LICENCE
You are free to use distcc.  It may be copied, modified or distributed
only under the terms of the GNU General Public Licence version 2 or
later.  A copy of the GPL is included in the file COPYING.
.SH SEE ALSO
distccd(1), ccache(1), gcc(1), make(1)
.I http://distcc.samba.org/
