=head1 NAME

C<razor-check> - Razor Filtering Agent 

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    razor-check [options]  [ mail1 [ mail2 .. ] ]

    $ cat mbox | razor-check
    $ razor-check ./mbox
    $ razor-check -d mbox mail.1 mail.2 mail.3

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<razor-check> checks a mail against the distributed Razor Catalogue by
communicating with a Razor Catalogue Server. It should be invoked before
the mail is delivered or processed by a human. C<razor-check> terminates
with exit value C<0> if the signature for the mail is catalogued on the
server (spam) or C<1> if the mail is not catalogued by the server (not a
spam). C<razor-check> should be invoked against every incoming mail by
mail processors (like procmail) or MTAs (like sendmail). An alternate
method would be to call C<razor-check> from cron, at regular intervals,
to identify and mark spam in queued mailboxes. 

If C<razor-check> is passed more than one mail, it will check each against
the database, printing out the serial number of every mail considered to
be spam.  C<razor-check> supports mbox-formatted files with 1 or more mails in
them as well as files containing a single RFC 822 (non-mbox) mail.  
More than one file may be present on the command line, can be either
a non-mbox or mbox in any order.
However, more than one non-mbox mail cannot be read from stdin.

=head1 USAGE 

C<razor-check> is usually run by piping the contents of the mail to it,
or by providing the name of the file that contains the mail message to
be checked as the last argument. C<razor-check> takes the following
arguments: 

=over 4 

=item C<-h> 

Print a usage message and exit. 

=item C<-v> 

Print the version number and exit. 

=item C<-d | --verbose> 

Print debugging information. 

=item C<-debuglevel=n | -dl=n> 

Set debug level to 'n'.  Default is 3 without C<-d> option, 9 with.

=item C<-whitelist=file>

Specify file to use for whitelisting.  Overrides 'whitelist' option in 
C<razor-agent.conf>.

=item C<-s> 

Simulate a check. Do everything except talk to the server. 

=item C<-conf=filename> 

Specifies an alternate configuration file. 
If not specified, it is computed, see razor-agents(1) manpage for details.
See razor-agent.conf(5) manpage for various configuration options.
The default is C<E<lt>razorhomeE<gt>/razor-agent.conf>.

=item C<-home=dir>

Specify razorhome directory.  This is where the configuration file, logfiles,
identities, and server files live.
If not specified, it is computed, see razor-agents(1) manpage for details.

=item C<-logfile=file>

Specify file to log to instead of what is in the configuration file.
The default is C<E<lt>razorhomeE<gt>/razor-agent.log>.

=item C<-rs=razor.server.com> 

Use this Razor Catalogue Server instead of reading C<servers.catalogue.lst>.

=item C<-H> 

Compute and print the signature of the mail contents and exit. If
C<-e=integer> is not specified, all supported engines will be used. 

=item C<-S=string> 

Accept a list of pre-computed (with C<-H>) signatures on the command
line, instead of computing one from mail content. Signatures can be
submitted in hex or base64, but base64 is preferred. Requires
C<-e=integer>. Usage: 

C<razor-report -e 1 -S a8a3d545adb73f9733675571ffeaf10cba87745b>

=item C<-e=integer> 

Specify engine used to create signatures. Must be 1, 2, 3, or 4 in this
version. Engine 1, or C<-e=1>, is used for Razor 1.x signatures. Used
only with C<-S=string> or C<-H>. 

=item C<-ep4=string> 

String used by engine 4 when computing signatures. Published by the Razor
Catalogue Servers and updated very frequently. Used only when C<-e=4>.


=back

=head1 RECIPES

C<razor-check> is usually invoked from procmail(1). Here are some common
ways of using it with procmail:

=over 4

=item To change the C<Subject> header if mail is spam:

    :0 Wc
    | razor-check
    :0 Waf
    | formail -i "Subject: Razor Warning: SPAM/UBE/UCE"

=item To add a C<X-Razor2-Warning> header to spam:

    :0 Wc
    | razor-check
    :0 Waf
    | formail -A "X-Razor2-Warning: SPAM."

=item To file spam in a mailbox

    :0 Wc
    | razor-check
    :0 Wa
    /home/foo/Mail/razor-caught

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

Vipul Ved Prakash E<lt>mail@vipul.netE<gt>, and Chad Norwood E<lt>chad@samo.orgE<gt>

=cut

=head1 SEE ALSO

razor-agents(1), razor-agent.conf(5), razor-admin(1), 
razor-report(1), razor-revoke(1), razor-whitelist(5)

=head1 LICENSE 

This is free software, distributed under the ARTISTIC license.

