=head1 NAME

Razor-Agents - Collection of files for checking, reporting, and revoking 
spam

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Vipul's Razor is a distributed, collaborative, spam detection, reporting, and filtering 
network. The primary focus of the system is to identify and remove all email 
spam from the internet.  Visit the website at http://razor.sourceforge.net/.

=head1 USAGE

First a razorhome directory should be created where log, conf, and cached server 
information will live.  This is done via C<-create> option to razor-create(1).
See man page for details.

You can immediately check spam using razor-check(1). 
See man page for details.

To report spam, an identity must be registered.  This is done via C<-register>
option to razor-admin(1).  After that, razor-report(1)
and razor-revoke(1) will work flawlessly.

=head1 CONFIGURATION

All Razor-Agents share a configuration file.  The contents of the 
configuration file are detailed in the razor-agent.conf(5) manpage.

Config file is computed before razorhome, in the following order:

 -conf=/path/file.conf           used if readable, else
 <home>/.razor/razor-agent.conf  used if readable, else
 /etc/razor/razor-agent.conf     used if readable, else
 all defaults are used.

To see configuration defaults, do
  razor-admin -create -conf=/tmp/razor2-defaults.conf

=head1 RAZORHOME

All Razor-Agents also share a razorhome directory, where identity, logging, 
and cached information about servers is stored.
Razorhome is computed after configuration file, in the following order.

 -home=/tmp/razor/                     used if readable, else
 'razorhome' from configuration file   used if readable, else
 <home>/.razor/                        used if readable, else
 <home>/.razor/                        is created.  if that fails, 
                                       no razorhome.


 NOTE: If there is no razorhome, razor-report and razor-revoke will 
       not work unless you specify  -ident=/path/identity 
       razor-check will still work.

=head1 FILES

Besides those listed at the end with their own manpages, Razor Agents 
also has the following files.

=over 4

=item B<razorhome/identity>

Usually a symlink to identity file containing user+pass.
Used by razor-report(1) and razor-revoke(1).

=item B<razorhome/razor-agent.log>

Default log file.  To change, edit razor-agent.conf(5).

=item B<razorhome/servers.*.lst>

Cached list of Razor Servers.  If more than one, they are ordered
by closest ping time.

=item B<razorhome/server.E<lt>nameE<gt>.lst>

Cached info for E<lt>nameE<gt> server. The C<srl> key in this file
is compared against the server greeting, and if server's is greater,
new cache info is retrieved from the server.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

=over 4

=item razor-check -d -debuglevel=9 mbox

Checks spam in mbox.  prints numbers for those found to be spam.
-d logs to stdout, -debuglevel=9 is verbose logging

=item razor-admin -create -home=/home/chad/.razor -d -s

Creates razorhome in /home/chad/.razor, log to stdout, does not connect to server (-s simulate). 

=item razor-report spam -debuglevel=0

sends spam to server, with no log msgs.

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

Vipul Ved Prakash, E<lt>mail@vipul.netE<gt> and Chad Norwood E<lt>chad@samo.orgE<gt>

=head1 SEE ALSO 

razor-agent.conf(5), razor-check(1), razor-admin(1), 
razor-report(1), razor-revoke(1), razor-whitelist(5)

=cut


