=head1 NAME

C<razor-agent.conf> - Configuration file for Razor Agents

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<razor-agent.conf> is a configuration file read by the razor agents,
which include razor-check(1), razor-admin(1), razor-report(1), and
razor-revoke(1). The format is "attribute = value" pairs, one pair per
line. Lines that begin with `#' are treated as comments. 

=head1 ATTRIBUTES

Following attributes can be specified:

=over 4

=item B<razorhome>

Directory where Razor Agents look for files.  All files in C<razor-agent.conf>
without a full path will be relative to C<razorhome>.
The default is C</etc/razor/> for root, and C<~/.razor/> for every other 
user.  If C<razorhome> does not exist, it will be created.

=item B<logfile>

Log file for the Razor Agents.  The default is C<razor-agent.log>.  

=item B<debuglevel>         

Controls the amount of messages written to logfile.  It is an integer between
0 and 20.  For Example, a value of C<1> logs only startup
and error messages, C<5> includes every transaction with the server, 
and C<14> is extremely verbose information intended for debugging use only.
NOTE: C<15> and higher create debug files on your filesystem -- do not use unless you
know what you are doing.
The default is C<5>.

=item B<identity>         

Specify an identify file to use for storing a newly registered identity
during razor-admin(1).  For razor-report(1) and razor-revoke(1), 
use this identity when authenticating with Razor Servers.
If not specified, C<E<lt>razorhomeE<gt>/identity-E<lt>userE<gt>> is used.

=item B<razorzone>

DNS zone where Razor Agents expect to find Razor Discovery Servers.
The Razor Agents query the Razor Discovery Servers to find the Razor
Catalogue Servers (for razor-check(1)) and Razor Nomination Servers (for 
razor-admin(1), razor-report(1), and razor-revoke(1)).
The default is C<razor.cloudmark.com>.

=item B<listfile_nomination>

File where Razor Nomination Servers are listed, in order of closest
TCP ping time.  Nomination Servers are used by razor-report(1) and razor-revoke(1).
This file is created automatically.
The default is C<servers.nomination.lst>.

=item B<listfile_catalogue>

File where Razor Catalogue Servers are listed, in order of closest
TCP ping time.  Catalogue Servers are used by razor-check(1).
This file is created automatically.
The default is C<servers.catalogue.lst>.

=item B<listfile_discovery>

File where Razor Discovery Servers are listed, in random order.
This file is created automatically using DNS.
The default is C<servers.discovery.lst>.

=item B<rediscovery_wait_dns>

Max time in seconds Razor Agents will wait before computing a new 
C<listfile_discovery> using DNS.
The default is C<604800>, which is 7 days.

=item B<rediscovery_wait>

Max time in seconds Razor Agents will wait before computing a new 
C<listfile_nomination> and a new C<listfile_catalogue>.  
The default is C<172800>, which is 2 days.

=item B<turn_off_discovery>

Turns off closest host discovery.  When set to 1, C<listfile_catalogue>
and C<listfile_nomination> will not be updated and C<listfile_discovery>
is not read or updated.  The default is C<0>.

=item B<ignorelist>         

Automatically ignore mailing list posts.  If set to C<0>, mailing
list posts will be handled like all other mail.
The default is C<0>.

=item B<whitelist>

Name of whitelist file. Razor Agents can consult a whitelist of addresses 
and SHA1 hashes before checking a mail with Razor Servers.
If the address/hash is found on the whitelist, the mail is marked `not spam', 
without checking against the server. The format of the whitelist can be found in 
razor-whitelist(5) manpage.  The default is C<razor-whitelist>.

=item B<min_cf>

When checking spam, the server optionally returns a spam confidence value
ranging from 0 (not confident) to 100 (absolutely or 100% confident).
To be considered spam, the server's spam confidence value must be greater 
than or equal to C<min_cf>.  C<min_cf> can be a number or an expression containing 
ac, the average confidence published by a Razor Server.  Examples: 0, 60,
100, ac, ac + 10, ac - 20.  If an expression evaluates to less than 0 it
becomes 0, likewise those greater than 100 become 100.
The default is C<ac>.

=item B<report_headers>

When reporting spam, the entire email (headers and body) is sent to 
a Razor Nomination Server.  When set to C<0>, all the headers are 
removed except headers beginning with C<Content-> before sending, 
and a special header beginning with C<X-Razor2> is added to note this action.  
The default is C<1>.

=item B<use_engines>

When performing checks, use at most these engines.  Takes a comma separated list
of integers, whitespace is ignored.  Each integer represents an engine that
is to be used to compute a signature from the mail to be checked.  
Engine 1 is SHA1 of entire mail (compatible with Razor version 1). Engines
2 and higher compute signatures of individual body parts (mime attachments).
Engine 2 is SHA1, Engine 3 is Nilsimsa, Engine 4 is Ephemeral Hash.  Note that
the actual signatures sent to the server is the intersection of this list,
the server supported engines, and the locally available engines.
The default is C<1, 3, 4>.

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

Vipul Ved Prakash, E<lt>mail@vipul.netE<gt> and Chad Norwood E<lt>chad@samo.orgE<gt>

=head1 SEE ALSO 

razor-agents(1), razor-check(1), razor-admin(1), 
razor-report(1), razor-revoke(1), razor-whitelist(5)

=cut



