.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Andries Brouwer
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License as specified in the README file that comes with the man 1.0
.\" distribution.  
.TH hman 1 "19 January 1998"
.LO 1
.SH NAME
hman \- browse the on-line manual pages
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hman
[ -P \fIbrowser\fP ] [ -H \fIhost\fP ] [ \fIsection\fP ] \fIname\fP
.br
.B hman
[ -P \fIbrowser\fP ] [ -H \fIhost\fP ] [ \fIsection\fP ] [ index ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.B hman
script is an interface to man2html(1) that allows you to enter man page
requests at the command line and view the output in your favourite
browser.
The behaviour reminds of that of
.BR man (1)
so that many people will be able to alias
.B hman
to
.BR man .
If the browser used is netscape, and an incarnation of netscape
is running already,
.B hman
will pass the request to the existing browser.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\^P " browser"
Specify which browser (like lynx, xmosaic, arena, chimera,
netscape, amaya, ...) to use. 
This option overrides the
.B MANHTMLPAGER
environment variable.
The default is the non-httpd version of
.BR lynx .
.TP
.B \-\^H " host"
Specify from what host to get the man pages.
This option overrides the
.B MANHTMLHOST
environment variable.
The default is
.BR localhost .

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
MANHTMLPAGER
The default browser to use is selected using this environment variable.
.TP
MANHTMLHOST
The default host to use is selected using this environment variable.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR man (1),
.BR man2html (1),
.BR arena (1),
.BR lynx (1),
.BR netscape (1),
.BR xmosaic (1),
.BR glimpse (1)

http://www.mcom.com/newsref/std/x-remote.html
