'\"
.\" (C) Copyright 1999 David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Wed Jul 14 23:00:00 1999 by David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org)
.TH MANLINT 1 "14 July 1999" "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
manlint \- program to report errors in man or mdoc pages
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR manlint " [ " options " ] [ " "list of files" " ] "
.SH DESCRIPTION
manlint
is a program that identifies lint (errors) in man or mdoc page formatting,
similar to a spelling checker for ordinary text.
Manlint has a list of permitted macros and escape sequences,
and reports the use of any macro or escape sequence not in the
permitted list.
This permitted list includes all the macros defined in
.BR man (7),
.BR mdoc (7),
and the safe subset of troff defined in
.BR man (7).
manlint also checks for conformance to various rules.
.PP
If a man page passes manlint, it should be widely portable, even
to tools such as
.BR man2html (1)
which don't implement all of troff.
.PP
If a list of files is omitted, the standard input is used.
A file by the name "-" is interpreted as the standard input.
.SH BUGS
Currently the program is very incomplete.
It doesn't have any options, it doesn't actually check escape sequences,
and it can't handle mdoc format.
Still, it's clear what it should do, and even in its current form
it can find lots of problems in existing man files.
.SH AUTHOR
David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org) was the original author of
.BR "manlint" .
Federico Lucifredi <flucifredi@acm.org> is the current maintainer.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR man (7),
.BR mdoc (7).
