{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f1\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;\f2\fnil\fcharset77 KohinoorDevanagari-Book;
\f3\fnil\fcharset134 STHeitiSC-Light;\f4\fnil\fcharset129 AppleSDGothicNeo-Regular;\f5\fnil\fcharset222 Thonburi;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red157\green17\blue179;\red15\green54\blue160;\red13\green77\blue230;
\red15\green77\blue229;\red221\green32\blue103;\red23\green79\blue175;\red9\green78\blue229;\red8\green78\blue230;
\red36\green79\blue175;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww27380\viewh22420\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Acknowledgements\

\b0\fs24 Portions of this Apple Software may utilize the following copyrighted material, the use of which is hereby acknowledged.\
\

\b 3Dlabs Inc. Ltd ( OpenGL2 Shader Language compiler )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2002-2004 3Dlabs Inc. Ltd\
This source code is published by 3Dlabs Inc. Ltd., and it is provided under the terms of this license agreement. Any use, reproduction or distribution of this source code constitutes recipient's acceptance of this agreement.  \
Permission to display, copy distribute, or use this source code for experimental, commercial or any other use is granted, provided that this entire 3Dlabs copyright statement and license agreement is retained.\
Permission to create derivative works from this source code is granted, provided all derivative works also retain this entire 3Dlabs copyright statement and license agreement.\
Any distribution, sublicensing or use of this code shall only be done in compliance with any export laws, restrictions, national security concerns or regulations of the United States or other applicable agency or authority. \
Neither this source code nor its use is represented to conform to any particular standard, specification, proposal or other set of requirements or conditions.  \
THIS SOURCE CODE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" WITH NO WARRANTIES WHATSOEVER, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY, OR OTHERWISE, AND 3DLABS EXPRESSLY DISCLAIMS ANY WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY, NON-INFRINGEMENT, FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE, OR ANY OTHER WARRANTY, NO MATTER HOW SUCH WARRANTY IS ALLEGED TO HAVE ARISEN. 3DLABS IS NOT LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, EXEMPLARY OR OTHER DAMAGES (INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION LOST PROFITS, DAMAGES BASED ON THE LOSS OF OR DAMAGE TO ANY RECORDS OR DATA, OR DAMAGES BASED ON A THIRD PARTY CLAIM) ARISING IN CONNECTION  WITH THIS SOURCE CODE, HOWEVER CAUSED AND NO MATTER THE THEORY OF LIABILITY, EVEN IF 3DLABS HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.\

\b \
Academia Sinica ( Academia Sinica Balanced Corpus of Modern Chinese )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 Academia Sinica.\
Used with copyright owner's permission.\

\b \
Adobe Systems Incorporated ( Adobe XMP Toolkit )
\b0 \
The BSD License\
Copyright \'a9 1999 - 2008, Adobe Systems Incorporated.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of Adobe Systems Incorporated, nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b \
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.  ( Bullet Collision Detection and Physics Library )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2012 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. http://bulletphysics.org \
This software is provided 'as-is', without any express or implied warranty. In no event will the authors be held liable for any damages arising from the use of this software. Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose, including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it freely, subject to the following restrictions: 1. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not claim that you wrote the original software. If you use this software in a product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be appreciated but is not required. 2. Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be misrepresented as being the original software. 3. This notice may not be removed or altered from any source distribution.
\b \
\
Ahmet A. Akin, Mehmet D. Akin. - Initial Developer ( Zemberek )\

\b0 The Original Code is "Zemberek Dogal Dil Isleme Kutuphanesi" / The Initial Developer of the Original Code is Ahmet A. Akin, Mehmet D. Akin. / Portions created by the Initial Developer are Copyright \'a9 2006 the Initial Developer. All Rights Reserved.\
The contents of this file are subject to the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/\
Software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing rights and limitations under the License.\

\b \
Istvan Albert ( altgraph )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2004 Istvan Albert unless otherwise noted.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Chris Allegretta, et al. ( nano )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1999-2004 Chris Allegretta, et al.\
The nano software is free software and is licensed under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL) as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the nano software under the terms of GPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple. The nano software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GPL for more details; a copy of the GPL is included with this product.  
\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU GPL Version 2, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]
\fs24 \
\

\b Anton Altaparmakov et al. ( Linux-NTFS kernel driver )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006-2007 Anton Altaparmakov et al.  All rights reserved.  <http://sourceforge.net/projects/linux-ntfs>.\
The Linux-NTFS kernel driver software is free software and is licensed under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL) as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the  Linux-NTFS kernel driver software under the terms of GPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple. The  Linux-NTFS kernel driver software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GPL for more details; a copy of the GPL is included with this product.  
\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU GPL Version 2, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]\

\fs24 \

\b Robert Ancell, Michael Duelli ( glchess )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2003 Robert Ancell, Michael Duelli.\
Permission granted to Apple to relicense under the following terms:\
Copyright \'a9 2003 Apple Computer, Inc. All rights reserved.\
IMPORTANT:  This Apple software is supplied to you by Apple Computer, Inc. (\'93Apple\'94) in consideration of your agreement to the following terms, and your use, installation, modification or redistribution of this Apple software constitutes acceptance of these terms.  If you do not agree with these terms, please do not use, install, modify or redistribute this Apple software.\
In consideration of your agreement to abide by the following terms, and subject to these terms, Apple grants you a personal, non-exclusive license, under Apple\'92s copyrights in this original Apple software (the \'93Apple Software\'94), to use, reproduce, modify and redistribute the Apple Software, with or without modifications, in source and/or binary forms; provided that if you redistribute the Apple Software in its entirety and without modifications, you must retain this notice and the following text and disclaimers in all such redistributions of the Apple Software.  Neither the name, trademarks, service marks or logos of Apple Computer, Inc. may be used to endorse or promote products derived from the Apple Software without specific prior written permission from Apple.  Except as expressly stated in this notice, no other rights or licenses, express or implied, are granted by Apple herein, including but not limited to any patent rights that may be infringed by your derivative works or by other works in which the Apple Software may be incorporated.\
The Apple Software is provided by Apple on an AS IS basis.  APPLE MAKES NO WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, REGARDING THE APPLE SOFTWARE OR ITS USE AND OPERATION ALONE OR IN COMBINATION WITH YOUR PRODUCTS. \
IN NO EVENT SHALL APPLE BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE, REPRODUCTION, MODIFICATION AND/OR DISTRIBUTION OF THE APPLE SOFTWARE, HOWEVER CAUSED AND WHETHER UNDER THEORY OF CONTRACT, TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE), STRICT LIABILITY OR OTHERWISE, EVEN IF APPLE HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b \
E. Anderson, et al. ( LAPACK )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1999 Anderson, E.; Bai, Z.; Bischof, C.; Blackford, S.; Demmel, J.; Dongarra, J.; Du Croz, J.; Greenbaum, A.; Hammarling, S.; McKenney, A. and Sorensen, D. \
LAPACK is a freely-available software package. It is available from netlib via anonymous ftp and the World Wide Web. Thus, it can be included in commercial software packages (and has been). We only ask that proper credit be given to the authors. \
Like all software, it is copyrighted. It is not trademarked, but we do ask the following: \
If you modify the source for these routines we ask that you change the name of the routine and comment the changes made to the original. We will gladly answer any questions regarding the software. If a modification is done, however, it is the responsibility of the person who modified the routine to provide support. \
\

\b Apache Software Foundation ( Ant, Apache, Apache Lucene Core, apache_mod_perl, apr, apr-util, derby, maven, OpenFst, Xerces ) 
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1995-2003 The Apache Software Foundation. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. The end-user documentation included with the redistribution, if any, must include the following acknowledgment:  This product includes software developed by the Apache Software Foundation (http://www.apache.org/).  Alternately, this acknowledgment may appear in the software itself, if and wherever such third-party acknowledgments normally appear.  4. The names Apache and Apache Software Foundation must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. For written permission, please contact apache@apache.org.  5. Products derived from this software may not be called Apache, nor may Apache appear in their name, without prior written permission of the Apache Software Foundation.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE APACHE SOFTWARE FOUNDATION OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF, SUCH DAMAGE.\
This software consists of voluntary contributions made by many individuals on behalf of the Apache Software Foundation.  For more information on the Apache Software Foundation, please see <http://www.apache.org/>.  Portions of this software are based upon public domain software originally written at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.\
Copyright \'a9 2004 The Apache Software Foundation. All rights reserved.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 Apache License\
Version 2.0, January 2004
\b0 \
\ul \ulc2 http://www.apache.org/licenses/\ulnone  \
TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR USE, REPRODUCTION, AND DISTRIBUTION \

\b 1. Definitions
\b0 .\
"License" shall mean the terms and conditions for use, reproduction, and distribution as defined by Sections 1 through 9 of this document. \
"Licensor" shall mean the copyright owner or entity authorized by the copyright owner that is granting the License. \
"Legal Entity" shall mean the union of the acting entity and all other entities that control, are controlled by, or are under common control with that entity. For the purposes of this definition, "control" means (i) the power, direct or indirect, to cause the direction or management of such entity, whether by contract or otherwise, or (ii) ownership of fifty percent (50%) or more of the outstanding shares, or (iii) beneficial ownership of such entity. \
"You" (or "Your") shall mean an individual or Legal Entity exercising permissions granted by this License. \
"Source" form shall mean the preferred form for making modifications, including but not limited to software source code, documentation source, and configuration files. \
"Object" form shall mean any form resulting from mechanical transformation or translation of a Source form, including but not limited to compiled object code, generated documentation, and conversions to other media types. \
"Work" shall mean the work of authorship, whether in Source or Object form, made available under the License, as indicated by a copyright notice that is included in or attached to the work (an example is provided in the Appendix below). \
"Derivative Works" shall mean any work, whether in Source or Object form, that is based on (or derived from) the Work and for which the editorial revisions, annotations, elaborations, or other modifications represent, as a whole, an original work of authorship. For the purposes of this License, Derivative Works shall not include works that remain separable from, or merely link (or bind by name) to the interfaces of, the Work and Derivative Works thereof. \
"Contribution" shall mean any work of authorship, including the original version of the Work and any modifications or additions to that Work or Derivative Works thereof, that is intentionally submitted to Licensor for inclusion in the Work by the copyright owner or by an individual or Legal Entity authorized to submit on behalf of the copyright owner. For the purposes of this definition, "submitted" means any form of electronic, verbal, or written communication sent to the Licensor or its representatives, including but not limited to communication on electronic mailing lists, source code control systems, and issue tracking systems that are managed by, or on behalf of, the Licensor for the purpose of discussing and improving the Work, but excluding communication that is conspicuously marked or otherwise designated in writing by the copyright owner as "Not a Contribution." \
"Contributor" shall mean Licensor and any individual or Legal Entity on behalf of whom a Contribution has been received by Licensor and subsequently incorporated within the Work. \

\b 2. Grant of Copyright License
\b0 . Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, each Contributor hereby grants to You a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable copyright license to reproduce, prepare Derivative Works of, publicly display, publicly perform, sublicense, and distribute the Work and such Derivative Works in Source or Object form. \

\b 3. Grant of Patent License
\b0 . Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, each Contributor hereby grants to You a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable (except as stated in this section) patent license to make, have made, use, offer to sell, sell, import, and otherwise transfer the Work, where such license applies only to those patent claims licensable by such Contributor that are necessarily infringed by their Contribution(s) alone or by combination of their Contribution(s) with the Work to which such Contribution(s) was submitted. If You institute patent litigation against any entity (including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that the Work or a Contribution incorporated within the Work constitutes direct or contributory patent infringement, then any patent licenses granted to You under this License for that Work shall terminate as of the date such litigation is filed. \

\b 4. Redistribution
\b0 . You may reproduce and distribute copies of the Work or Derivative Works thereof in any medium, with or without modifications, and in Source or Object form, provided that You meet the following conditions: \
a.	You must give any other recipients of the Work or Derivative Works a copy of this License; and \
b.	You must cause any modified files to carry prominent notices stating that You changed the files; and \
c.	You must retain, in the Source form of any Derivative Works that You distribute, all copyright, patent, trademark, and attribution notices from the Source form of the Work, excluding those notices that do not pertain to any part of the Derivative Works; and \
d.	If the Work includes a "NOTICE" text file as part of its distribution, then any Derivative Works that You distribute must include a readable copy of the attribution notices contained within such NOTICE file, excluding those notices that do not pertain to any part of the Derivative Works, in at least one of the following places: within a NOTICE text file distributed as part of the Derivative Works; within the Source form or documentation, if provided along with the Derivative Works; or, within a display generated by the Derivative Works, if and wherever such third-party notices normally appear. The contents of the NOTICE file are for informational purposes only and do not modify the License. You may add Your own attribution notices within Derivative Works that You distribute, alongside or as an addendum to the NOTICE text from the Work, provided that such additional attribution notices cannot be construed as modifying the License.\
You may add Your own copyright statement to Your modifications and may provide additional or different license terms and conditions for use, reproduction, or distribution of Your modifications, or for any such Derivative Works as a whole, provided Your use, reproduction, and distribution of the Work otherwise complies with the conditions stated in this License. \

\b 5. Submission of Contributions
\b0 . Unless You explicitly state otherwise, any Contribution intentionally submitted for inclusion in the Work by You to the Licensor shall be under the terms and conditions of this License, without any additional terms or conditions. Notwithstanding the above, nothing herein shall supersede or modify the terms of any separate license agreement you may have executed with Licensor regarding such Contributions. \

\b 6. Trademarks
\b0 . This License does not grant permission to use the trade names, trademarks, service marks, or product names of the Licensor, except as required for reasonable and customary use in describing the origin of the Work and reproducing the content of the NOTICE file. \

\b 7. Disclaimer of Warranty
\b0 . Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, Licensor provides the Work (and each Contributor provides its Contributions) on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied, including, without limitation, any warranties or conditions of TITLE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY, or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. You are solely responsible for determining the appropriateness of using or redistributing the Work and assume any risks associated with Your exercise of permissions under this License. \

\b 8. Limitation of Liability
\b0 . In no event and under no legal theory, whether in tort (including negligence), contract, or otherwise, unless required by applicable law (such as deliberate and grossly negligent acts) or agreed to in writing, shall any Contributor be liable to You for damages, including any direct, indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages of any character arising as a result of this License or out of the use or inability to use the Work (including but not limited to damages for loss of goodwill, work stoppage, computer failure or malfunction, or any and all other commercial damages or losses), even if such Contributor has been advised of the possibility of such damages. \

\b 9. Accepting Warranty or Additional Liability
\b0 . While redistributing the Work or Derivative Works thereof, You may choose to offer, and charge a fee for, acceptance of support, warranty, indemnity, or other liability obligations and/or rights consistent with this License. However, in accepting such obligations, You may act only on Your own behalf and on Your sole responsibility, not on behalf of any other Contributor, and only if You agree to indemnify, defend, and hold each Contributor harmless for any liability incurred by, or claims asserted against, such Contributor by reason of your accepting any such warranty or additional liability. \
END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural

\b\fs24 \cf0 APACHE PORTABLE RUNTIME SUBCOMPONENTS:
\b0  \
The Apache Portable Runtime (APR) includes a number of subcomponents with separate copyright notices and license terms. Your use of the source code for the these subcomponents is subject to the terms and conditions of the following licenses. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural

\fs20 \cf0 From strings/apr_fnmatch.c, include/apr_fnmatch.h, misc/unix/getopt.c, file_io/unix/mktemp.c, strings/apr_strings.c:\
Copyright \'a9 1987, 1993, 1994 The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement:  This product includes software developed by the University of California, Berkeley and its contributors.  4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
From network_io/unix/inet_ntop.c, network_io/unix/inet_pton.c:\
Copyright \'a9 1996 by Internet Software Consortium.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\
From dso/aix/dso.c:\
Based on libdl (dlfcn.c/dlfcn.h) which is Copyright \'a9 1992,1993,1995,1996,1997,1988 Jens-Uwe Mager, Helios Software GmbH, Hannover, Germany.  \
Not derived from licensed software.  Permission is granted to freely use, copy, modify, and redistribute this software, provided that the author is not construed to be liable for any results of using the software, alterations are clearly marked as such, and this notice is not modified.\
\
From strings/apr_strnatcmp.c, include/apr_strings.h:\
strnatcmp.c -- Perform 'natural order' comparisons of strings in C.  Copyright \'a9 2000 by Martin Pool <mbp@humbug.org.au>\
This software is provided 'as-is', without any express or implied warranty.  In no event will the authors be held liable for any damages arising from the use of this software.\
Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose, including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it freely, subject to the following restrictions:\
1. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not claim that you wrote the original software. If you use this software in a product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be appreciated but is not required.  2. Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be misrepresented as being the original software.  3. This notice may not be removed or altered from any source distribution.\
\
For the include\\apr_md5.h component and for the passwd\\apr_md5.c component:\
This is work is derived from material Copyright RSA Data Security, Inc.\
The RSA copyright statement and Licence for that original material is included below. This is followed by the Apache copyright statement and licence for the modifications made to that material.\
Copyright \'a9 1991-2, RSA Data Security, Inc. Created 1991. All rights reserved.\
License to copy and use this software is granted provided that it is identified as the "RSA Data Security, Inc. MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm" in all material mentioning or referencing this software or this function.\
License is also granted to make and use derivative works provided that such works are identified as "derived from the RSA Data Security, Inc. MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm" in all material mentioning or referencing the derived work.  RSA Data Security, Inc. makes no representations concerning either the merchantability of this software or the suitability of this software for any particular purpose. It is provided "as is" without express or implied warranty of any kind. These notices must be retained in any copies of any part of this documentation and/or software.\
The apr_md5_encode() routine uses much code obtained from the FreeBSD 3.0 MD5 crypt() function, which is licenced as follows:\
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------\
  "THE BEER-WARE LICENSE" (Revision 42):\
  <phk@login.dknet.dk> wrote this file.  As long as you retain this notice you can do whatever you want with this stuff. If we meet some day, and you think this stuff is worth it, you can buy me a beer in return.  Poul-Henning Kamp\
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------\
\
For the crypto\\apr_md4.c component and for the include\\apr_md4.h component:\
This is derived from material copyright RSA Data Security, Inc.  Their notice is reproduced below in its entirety.\
Copyright \'a9 1991-2, RSA Data Security, Inc. Created 1991. All rights reserved.\
License to copy and use this software is granted provided that it is identified as the "RSA Data Security, Inc. MD4 Message-Digest Algorithm" in all material mentioning or referencing this software or this function.\
License is also granted to make and use derivative works provided that such works are identified as "derived from the RSA Data Security, Inc. MD4 Message-Digest Algorithm" in all material mentioning or referencing the derived work.  RSA Data Security, Inc. makes no representations concerning either the merchantability of this software or the suitability of this software for any particular purpose. It is provided "as is"without express or implied warranty of any kind.  These notices must be retained in any copies of any part of this documentation and/or software.\
\
For the test\\testmd4.c component:\
This is derived from material copyright RSA Data Security, Inc. Their notice is reproduced below in its entirety.\
Copyright \'a9 1990-2, RSA Data Security, Inc. Created 1990. All rights reserved.\
RSA Data Security, Inc. makes no representations concerning either the merchantability of this software or the suitability of this software for any particular purpose. It is provided "as is"without express or implied warranty of any kind.  These notices must be retained in any copies of any part of this documentation and/or software.\
\
For the xml\\expat\\conftools\\install-sh component:\
install - install a program, script, or datafile\
This comes from X11R5 (mit/util/scripts/install.sh).\
Copyright 1991 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology\
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of M.I.T. not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.  M.I.T. makes no representations about the suitability of this software for any purpose.  It is provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
\fs24 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Apple Inc., et al. ( DCERPC )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2010 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1.  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
2.  Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. \
3.  Neither the name of Apple Inc. ("Apple") nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY APPLE AND ITS CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL APPLE OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Portions of this software have been released under the following terms:\
\'a9 Copyright 1989-1993 OPEN SOFTWARE FOUNDATION, INC.\
\'a9 Copyright 1989-1993 HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY\
\'a9 Copyright 1989-1993 DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORPORATION\
To anyone who acknowledges that this file is provided "AS IS" without any express or implied warranty:\
permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this file for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided that the above copyright notices and this notice appears in all source code copies, and that none of the names of Open Software Foundation, Inc., Hewlett-Packard Company or Digital Equipment Corporation be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission. \'a0Neither Open Software Foundation, Inc., Hewlett-Packard Company nor Digital Equipment Corporation makes any representations about the suitability of this software for any purpose.\
Copyright \'a9 2007, Novell, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of the Novell, Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Austin Appleby ( murmur hash )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2010 Austin Appleby \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
\b \
\
AT&T ( C Library )
\b0 \
The author of this software is David M. Gay.  Copyright \'a9 1991 by AT&T.  \
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose without fee is hereby granted, provided that this entire notice is included in all copies of any software which is or includes a copy or modification of this software and in all copies of the supporting documentation for such software.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED AS IS, WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTY.  IN PARTICULAR, NEITHER THE AUTHOR NOR AT&T MAKES ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE MERCHANTABILITY OF THIS SOFTWARE OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\
\

\b AT&T ( ksh )  
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 AT&T Corp.  All rights reserved.  AT&T is a registered trademark of AT&T Corp. Source code for the ksh software may be found here:  http://www.research.att.com/sw/download/.  \
This product contains certain software code or other information (\'93AT&T Software\'94) proprietary to AT&T Corp. (\'93AT&T\'94).  The AT&T Software is provided to you \'93AS IS\'94. YOU ASSUME TOTAL RESPONSIBILITY AND RISK FOR USE OF THE AT&T SOFTWARE.  AT&T DOES NOT MAKE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIMS, ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND WHATSOEVER, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, WARRANTIES OF TITLE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT OF ANY INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS.\
Unless you accept a license to use the source code for the AT&T Software, you shall not reverse compile, disassemble or otherwise reverse engineer this product to ascertain the source code for any AT&T Software. AT&T has previously made versions of this software available under the AT&T Source Code Agreement, version 1.2D and earlier. If you received a copy of the software under that license agreement, you may continue to use and distribute the same version of the software subject to the terms and conditions of the license agreement under which the software was received. However, current versions of the software are now licensed on an open source basis only under The Common Public License.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b \cf0 AT&T, Lucent Technologies and Bellcore ( f2c )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1990-1997 by AT&T, Lucent Technologies and Bellcore.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that the copyright notice and this permission notice and warranty disclaimer appear in supporting documentation, and that the names of AT&T, Bell Laboratories, Lucent or Bellcore or any of their entities not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.\
AT&T, Lucent and Bellcore disclaim all warranties with regard to this software, including all implied warranties of merchantability and fitness.  In no event shall AT&T, Lucent or Bellcore be liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or profits, whether in an action of contract, negligence or other tortious action, arising out of or in connection with the use or performance of this software.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Atlas Project ( Atlas )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1997-2001 R. Clint Whaley, Antoine Petitet, et al. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. The name of the ATLAS group or the names of its contributors may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE UNIVERSITY OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b David Bailman ( Ferret )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2005-2006 David Balmain\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Arwid Bancewicz ( jQuery scrollintoview )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2011 Arwid Bancewicz \
Licensed under the MIT license http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php http://requirejs.org\
jQuery scrollintoview() plugin and :scrollable selector filter  * Version 1.8 (14 Jul 2011) * Requires jQuery 1.4 or newer \
\
Copyright 2011 Arwid Bancewicz Licensed under the MIT license http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php http://requirejs.org\
\

\b Stefano Barbato ( Mimetic )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The MIT License\
Copyright \'a9 2009 Stefano Barbato\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Dominik Bathon ( RubyNode )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006-2007 Dominik Bathon.\
You can obtain the RubyNode source here:  http://rubynode.rubyforge.org.  \
RubyNode is released under the Ruby license.  
\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the Ruby License, please refer to the Yukihiro Matsumoto (Ruby) attribution, where a copy of the Ruby License is included]
\b\fs24 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Kent Beck, Erich Gamma ( JUnit ) 
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006 Kent Beck, Erich Gamma.  \
JUnit is open source software, released under the Common Public License Version 1.0.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 Common Public License Version 1.0
\b0 \
THE ACCOMPANYING PROGRAM IS PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THIS COMMON PUBLIC LICENSE ("AGREEMENT"). ANY USE, REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION OF THE PROGRAM CONSTITUTES RECIPIENT'S ACCEPTANCE OF THIS AGREEMENT.\
1. DEFINITIONS\
"Contribution" means:\
a) in the case of the initial Contributor, the initial code and documentation distributed under this Agreement, and\
b) in the case of each subsequent Contributor:\
i) changes to the Program, and\
ii) additions to the Program;\
where such changes and/or additions to the Program originate from and are distributed by that particular Contributor. A Contribution 'originates' from a Contributor if it was added to the Program by such Contributor itself or anyone acting on such Contributor's behalf. Contributions do not include additions to the Program which: (i) are separate modules of software distributed in conjunction with the Program under their own license agreement, and (ii) are not derivative works of the Program.\
"Contributor" means any person or entity that distributes the Program.\
"Licensed Patents " mean patent claims licensable by a Contributor which are necessarily infringed by the use or sale of its Contribution alone or when combined with the Program.\
"Program" means the Contributions distributed in accordance with this Agreement.\
"Recipient" means anyone who receives the Program under this Agreement, including all Contributors.\
2. GRANT OF RIGHTS\
a) Subject to the terms of this Agreement, each Contributor hereby grants Recipient a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free copyright license to reproduce, prepare derivative works of, publicly display, publicly perform, distribute and sublicense the Contribution of such Contributor, if any, and such derivative works, in source code and object code form. \
b) Subject to the terms of this Agreement, each Contributor hereby grants Recipient a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free patent license under Licensed Patents to make, use, sell, offer to sell, import and otherwise transfer the Contribution of such Contributor, if any, in source code and object code form. This patent license shall apply to the combination of the Contribution and the Program if, at the time the Contribution is added by the Contributor, such addition of the Contribution causes such combination to be covered by the Licensed Patents. The patent license shall not apply to any other combinations which include the Contribution. No hardware per se is licensed hereunder.\
c) Recipient understands that although each Contributor grants the licenses to its Contributions set forth herein, no assurances are provided by any Contributor that the Program does not infringe the patent or other intellectual property rights of any other entity. Each Contributor disclaims any liability to Recipient for claims brought by any other entity based on infringement of intellectual property rights or otherwise. As a condition to exercising the rights and licenses granted hereunder, each Recipient hereby assumes sole responsibility to secure any other intellectual property rights needed, if any. For example, if a third party patent license is required to allow Recipient to distribute the Program, it is Recipient's responsibility to acquire that license before distributing the Program. \
d) Each Contributor represents that to its knowledge it has sufficient copyright rights in its Contribution, if any, to grant the copyright license set forth in this Agreement.\
3. REQUIREMENTS\
A Contributor may choose to distribute the Program in object code form under its own license agreement, provided that:\
a) it complies with the terms and conditions of this Agreement; and\
b) its license agreement:\
i) effectively disclaims on behalf of all Contributors all warranties and conditions, express and implied, including warranties or conditions of title and non-infringement, and implied warranties or conditions of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose;\
ii) effectively excludes on behalf of all Contributors all liability for damages, including direct, indirect, special, incidental and consequential damages, such as lost profits;\
iii) states that any provisions which differ from this Agreement are offered by that Contributor alone and not by any other party; and\
iv) states that source code for the Program is available from such Contributor, and informs licensees how to obtain it in a reasonable manner on or through a medium customarily used for software exchange.\
When the Program is made available in source code form:\
a) it must be made available under this Agreement; and\
b) a copy of this Agreement must be included with each copy of the Program.\
Contributors may not remove or alter any copyright notices contained within the Program. Each Contributor must identify itself as the originator of its Contribution, if any, in a manner that reasonably allows subsequent Recipients to identify the originator of the Contribution.\
4. COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION\
Commercial distributors of software may accept certain responsibilities with respect to end users, business partners and the like. While this license is intended to facilitate the commercial use of the Program, the Contributor who includes the Program in a commercial product offering should do so in a manner which does not create potential liability for other Contributors. Therefore, if a Contributor includes the Program in a commercial product offering, such Contributor ("Commercial Contributor") hereby agrees to defend and indemnify every other Contributor ("Indemnified Contributor") against any losses, damages and costs (collectively "Losses") arising from claims, lawsuits and other legal actions brought by a third party against the Indemnified Contributor to the extent caused by the acts or omissions of such Commercial Contributor in connection with its distribution of the Program in a commercial product offering. The obligations in this section do not apply to any claims or Losses relating to any actual or alleged intellectual property infringement. In order to qualify, an Indemnified Contributor must: a) promptly notify the Commercial Contributor in writing of such claim, and b) allow the Commercial Contributor to control, and cooperate with the Commercial Contributor in, the defense and any related settlement negotiations. The Indemnified Contributor may participate in any such claim at its own expense. For example, a Contributor might include the Program in a commercial product offering, Product X. That Contributor is then a Commercial Contributor. If that Commercial Contributor then makes performance claims, or offers warranties related to Product X, those performance claims and warranties are such Commercial Contributor's responsibility alone. Under this section, the Commercial Contributor would have to defend claims against the other Contributors related to those performance claims and warranties, and if a court requires any other Contributor to pay any damages as a result, the Commercial Contributor must pay those damages. \
5. NO WARRANTY\
EXCEPT AS EXPRESSLY SET FORTH IN THIS AGREEMENT, THE PROGRAM IS PROVIDED ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF TITLE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. Each Recipient is solely responsible for determining the appropriateness of using and distributing the Program and assumes all risks associated with its exercise of rights under this Agreement, including but not limited to the risks and costs of program errors, compliance with applicable laws, damage to or loss of data, programs or equipment, and unavailability or interruption of operations.\
6. DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY\
EXCEPT AS EXPRESSLY SET FORTH IN THIS AGREEMENT, NEITHER RECIPIENT NOR ANY CONTRIBUTORS SHALL HAVE ANY LIABILITY FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION LOST PROFITS), HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OR DISTRIBUTION OF THE PROGRAM OR THE EXERCISE OF ANY RIGHTS GRANTED HEREUNDER, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.\
7. GENERAL\
If any provision of this Agreement is invalid or unenforceable under applicable law, it shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of the terms of this Agreement, and without further action by the parties hereto, such provision shall be reformed to the minimum extent necessary to make such provision valid and enforceable. If Recipient institutes patent litigation against a Contributor with respect to a patent applicable to software (including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit), then any patent licenses granted by that Contributor to such Recipient under this Agreement shall terminate as of the date such litigation is filed. In addition, if Recipient institutes patent litigation against any entity (including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that the Program itself (excluding combinations of the Program with other software or hardware) infringes such Recipient's patent(s), then such Recipient's rights granted under Section 2(b) shall terminate as of the date such litigation is filed.\
All Recipient's rights under this Agreement shall terminate if it fails to comply with any of the material terms or conditions of this Agreement and does not cure such failure in a reasonable period of time after becoming aware of such noncompliance. If all Recipient's rights under this Agreement terminate, Recipient agrees to cease use and distribution of the Program as soon as reasonably practicable. However, Recipient's obligations under this Agreement and any licenses granted by Recipient relating to the Program shall continue and survive.\
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute copies of this Agreement, but in order to avoid inconsistency the Agreement is copyrighted and may only be modified in the following manner. The Agreement Steward reserves the right to publish new versions (including revisions) of this Agreement from time to time. No one other than the Agreement Steward has the right to modify this Agreement. IBM is the initial Agreement Steward. IBM may assign the responsibility to serve as the Agreement Steward to a suitable separate entity. Each new version of the Agreement will be given a distinguishing version number. The Program (including Contributions) may always be distributed subject to the version of the Agreement under which it was received. In addition, after a new version of the Agreement is published, Contributor may elect to distribute the Program (including its Contributions) under the new version. Except as expressly stated in Sections 2(a) and 2(b) above, Recipient receives no rights or licenses to the intellectual property of any Contributor under this Agreement, whether expressly, by implication, estoppel or otherwise. All rights in the Program not expressly granted under this Agreement are reserved. This Agreement is governed by the laws of the State of New York and the intellectual property laws of the United States of America. No party to this Agreement will bring a legal action under this Agreement more than one year after the cause of action arose. Each party waives its rights to a jury trial in any resulting litigation.
\b\fs24 \
\
Michael W. Berry ( SVDPACKC )
\b0  \
Copyright \'a9 1993 Michael W. Berry, et al. \'a0All rights reserved. \
Used with permission from the author.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b \cf0 Stuart Bishop ( pytz )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2003-2009 Stuart Bishop <stuart@stuartbishop.net>\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Bitstream, Inc. ( Bitstream Vera Font, Bitstream DejaVu Font )
\b0 \
Bitstream Vera Fonts Copyright\
The fonts have a generous copyright, allowing derivative works (as long as "Bitstream" or "Vera" are not in the names), and full redistribution (so long as they are not *sold* by themselves). They can be bundled, redistributed and sold with any software.  The fonts are distributed under the following copyright: \
Copyright\
Copyright \'a9 2003 by Bitstream, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Bitstream Vera is a trademark of Bitstream, Inc. \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of the fonts accompanying this license (\'93Fonts\'94) and associated documentation files (the \'93Font Software\'94), to reproduce and distribute the Font Software, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies of the Font Software, and to permit persons to whom the Font Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright and trademark notices and this permission notice shall be included in all copies of one or more of the Font Software typefaces.\
The Font Software may be modified, altered, or added to, and in particular the designs of glyphs or characters in the Fonts may be modified and additional glyphs or characters may be added to the Fonts, only if the fonts are renamed to names not containing either the words \'93Bitstream\'94 or the word \'93Vera\'94.\
This License becomes null and void to the extent applicable to Fonts or Font Software that has been modified and is distributed under the \'93Bitstream Vera\'94 names. \
The Font Software may be sold as part of a larger software package but no copy of one or more of the Font Software typefaces may be sold by itself. \
THE FONT SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT, PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR OTHER RIGHT. IN NO EVENT SHALL BITSTREAM OR THE GNOME FOUNDATION BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE FONT SOFTWARE OR FROM OTHER DEALINGS IN THE FONT SOFTWARE. \
Except as contained in this notice, the names of Gnome, the Gnome Foundation, and Bitstream Inc., shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Font Software without prior written authorization from the Gnome Foundation or Bitstream Inc., respectively. For further information, contact: fonts at gnome dot org. 
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 David Blackman and Sebastiano Vigna ( xoroshiro 128+ )
\b0 \
Written in 2016 by David Blackman and Sebastiano Vigna (vigna@acm.org)\
To the extent possible under law, the author has dedicated all copyright and related and neighboring rights to this software to the public domain worldwide. This software is distributed without any warranty.\
\

\b Rob Braun ( XAR )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2005 Rob Braun. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. Neither the name of Rob Braun nor the names of his contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Stig Brautaset ( json-framework )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2009 Stig Brautaset. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of the author nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Rainer Brockerhoff ( US International Keyboard )
\b0 \
The "US International" keyboard layout was prepared by Rainer Brockerhoff and is licensed under the MIT license, approved by the Open Source Initiative.  Check for updates and instructions at http://www.brockerhoff.net/usi.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
"US International" is provided "AS IS", without warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to the warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose and noninfringement. In no event shall the authors or copyright holders be liable for any claim, damages or other liability, whether in an action of contract, tort or otherwise, arising from, out of or in connection with the software or the use or other dealings in the software.
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 The Brotli Authors ( Brotli )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2009, 2010, 2013-2016 by the Brotli Authors.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Simon Brouwer ( OpenTall )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006-2010 OpenTaal, \'a9 2001-2005 Simon Brouwer e.a.,\'a9 1996 Nederlandstalige Tex Gebruikersgroep \
[ENGLISH] You are kindly requested to read this file "license_en_EN.txt" and to keep a copy of it with every copy you make of this language file. \
1. Name: Dutch word list for spell checking - OpenTaal \
2. Version of words list: 2.10G; version of spell checking: 2.10G. \
3. Requirements: Hunspell 1.2.8 and higher \
4. Spelling Seal of Dutch Language Union: The OpenTaal list of lemmas has received the Spelling Seal of Approval from the Dutch Language Union, the formal Dutch language institute. For more information please see: http://www.taalunieversum.org/keurmerk/ \
5. Copyrights: \'a9 2006-2010 OpenTaal, \'a9 2001-2005 Simon Brouwer e.a., \'a9 1996 Nederlandstalige Tex Gebruikersgroep \
6. Licenses: OpenTaal aims to create and publish free Dutch language files. To enable the broadest (re)use the language files are freely available under the below, liberal licenses at the discretion of the user. We strongly recommend to read the applicable license before usage. \
	A. BSD (revised version): - Full license text: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BSD/legalcode - Summary: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BSD/deed.en B. Creative Commons, Attribution 3.0 (unported) - Full license text: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode - Summary: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/deed.en \
7. Support OpenTaal: OpenTaal is a non-profit volunteer project. With your (small) financial support OpenTaal will further expand its activities and enhance its professionalism. Your donation is welcome at account number: 15.62.32.782, BIC: RABONL2U, IBAN: NL88RABO0156232782 of Stichting OpenTaal / OpenTaal Foundation. In the Netherlands your donations are tax deductible. OpenTaal Foundation has been designated by the Dutch Tax Administration as an Institution for General Benefit (algemeen nut beogende instelling or ANBI). Please see: http://belastingdienst.nl/anbi/ \
8. Participate: Everyone is welcome to participate. Please give feedback, discuss on the mailing list or run Harvester. By contributing to the project you agree that your contribution is available under free or/open source licenses. In case you wish, your name will be mentioned on the website. Your are invited to send us your written request. \
9. Rights of third parties: OpenTaal respects the rights of third parties and aims to keep its data freely available. Therefore you may no use protected sources of third parties, i.e. dictionaries, without their permission when you contribute to the project. It is permitted to use the materials of the Dutch Language Union, i.e. their spelling instruction and word list. In case you believe OpenTaal is violating your rights, we ask you to send us a written notice as soon as possible. \
10.Contact: OpenTaal Foundation, http://www.opentaal.org, bestuur@opentaal.org \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl300

\b \cf0 Jamis Buck ( Capistrano )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2005-2007 Jamis Buck <jamis@37signals.com>.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Jamis Buck ( needle, Ruby Net::SSH )
\b0 \
Needle and Ruby Net::SSH are copyrighted free software by Jamis Buck <jamis@37signals.com>.\
The reader is hereby granted permission to redistribute and/or modify it under the terms of the BSD license, the Ruby license, or (by association with the Ruby license) the GPL, at the reader's option. Look in the "doc" subdirectory, and see the LICENSE-BSD, LICENSE-RUBY and LICENSE-GPL files for the text of these licenses.\
Copyright \'a9 2004, Jamis Buck (jamis@37signals.com).  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
The names of its contributors may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b \
Jamis Buck ( sqlite3-ruby )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2004, Jamis Buck (jgb3@email.byu.edu).  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
The names of its contributors may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Bill Bumgarner, et. al ( pyobjc )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2002, 2003 - Bill Bumgarner, Ronald Oussoren, Steve Majewski, Lele Gaifax, et.al. Copyright 2003-2013 - Ronald Oussoren \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
\b \
\
Mathias Bynens ( Punycode.js )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 Mathias Bynens <https://mathiasbynens.be/>\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
\b \
\
Cairo Project ( Cairo )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2002-2008 various contributors.\
Cairo is free software.\
Every source file in the implementation of cairo is available to be redistributed and/or modified under the terms of either the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL) version 2.1 or the Mozilla Public License (MPL) version 1.1.  Some files are available under more liberal terms, but we believe that in all cases, each file may be used under either the LGPL or the MPL.  See the following files in this directory for the precise terms and conditions of either license:  COPYING-LGPL-2.1, COPYING-MPL-1.1.  You may obtain a copy of the MPL 1.1 at http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/, and a copy of the LGPL 2.1 at http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-2.1.html.
\b \

\b0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Carnegie Mellon University ( Mach Operating System )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1991 Carnegie Mellon University. All rights reserved.\
Permission to use, copy, modify and distribute this software and its documentation is hereby granted, provided that both the copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies of the software, derivative works or modified versions, and any portions thereof, and that both notices appear in supporting documentation.\
CARNEGIE MELLON ALLOWS FREE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE IN ITS AS IS CONDITION.  CARNEGIE MELLON DISCLAIMS ANY LIABILITY OF ANY KIND FOR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
Carnegie Mellon requests users of this software to return to Software.Distribution@CS.CMU.EDU; or Software Distribution Coordinator, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA 15213-3890; any improvements or extensions that they make and grant Carnegie Mellon the rights to redistribute these changes.\
\

\b Carnegie Mellon University ( Cyrus SASL library )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2000 Carnegie Mellon University. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. The name Carnegie Mellon University must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. For permission or any other legal details, please contact: Office of Technology Transfer, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA  15213-3890. (412) 268-4387, fax: (412) 268-7395, tech-transfer@andrew.cmu.edu.  4. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following acknowledgment:  This product includes software developed by Computing Services at Carnegie Mellon University (http://www.cmu.edu/computing/).\
CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Carnegie Mellon University; Paul Mackerras ( pppd 
\b0 )\
Copyright \'a9 1993-2002 Paul Mackerras. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. The name(s) of the authors of this software must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. 4. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following acknowledgment: This product includes software developed by Paul Mackerras<paulus@samba.org>.\
THE AUTHORS OF THIS SOFTWARE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
Derived from main.c, which is:\
Copyright \'a9 1984-2000 Carnegie Mellon University. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. The name Carnegie Mellon University must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. For permission or any other legal details, please contact: Office of Technology Transfer, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA  15213-3890. (412) 268-4387, fax: (412) 268-7395, tech-transfer@andrew.cmu.edu.  4. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following acknowledgment:  This product includes software developed by Computing Services at Carnegie Mellon University (http://www.cmu.edu/computing/).\
CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Ed Casas ( efax )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1993-1999 by Ed Casas.\
The efax software is released under the GNU General Public License Version 2. You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the efax software under the terms of GNU General Public License (GPL), without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple.  The efax software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GPL for more details; a copy of the GPL is included with this product.
\b\fs20   
\b0 [Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU GPL Version 2, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]
\fs24 \

\b \
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin ( LIBSVM )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2000-2014 Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. All rights reserved. \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither name of copyright holders nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS \'93AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. \'a0IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Sean Chittenden, Wai-Sun "Squidster" Chia, Charles Savage ( Libxml-Ruby )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2008-2013 Charles Savage and contributors\
Copyright \'a9 2002-2007 Sean Chittenden and contributors\
Copyright \'a9 2001 Wai-Sun "Squidster" Chia \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\

\b \
Juliusz Chroboczek ( babeld, shncpd )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 babeld:  Copyright \'a9 2007, 2008 by Juliusz Chroboczek\
shncpd:  Copyright \'a9 2015 by Juliusz Chroboczek\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
The Chromium Authors ( Chromium, HSTS preloaded list )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Chromium:  Copyright \'a9 2015 The Chromium Authors. All rights reserved.\
HSTS preloaded list:  Copyright \'a9 2013 The Chromium Authors.  All rights reserved.
\b \

\b0 Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
\
Cisco Systems, Inc. ( SRTP )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2001-2006, Cisco Systems, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of the Cisco Systems, Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
Eric Circlaeys ( CFrameworks library )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2002-2007 Globalii Group. All rights reserved.  Globalii Group http://homepage.mac.com/eric.c/globalii/.  Contributed by Eric Circlaeys <eric.c@mac.com>\
The content of this file constitutes Original Code as defined in and is subject to the BSD License.  You may not use this file except in compliance with the License. \
GLOBALII LICENSE\
Copyright \'a9 2002-2007, Eric Circlaeys.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
- Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
- Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
- Neither the name of Globalii nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Tito Ciuro ( QuickLite )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2004, Tito Ciuro. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
\'95 Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
\'95 Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
\'95 Neither the name of Tito Ciuro nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b CNRA ( wapiti )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2009-2013 CNRS All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
\
CNRI, SCGI package developers ( mod_scgi )\

\b0 This version of the SCGI package is derived from scgi 1.10, released by CNRI.  See doc/LICENSE_110.txt for the licensing terms of that release.  Changes made since that release are summarized in the CHANGES.txt file along with a list of authors. Those changes are made available under the following terms (commonly known as the MIT/X license).\
Copyright \'a9 the SCGI package developers.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:  The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 CNRI OPEN SOURCE LICENSE AGREEMENT
\b0 \
IMPORTANT: PLEASE READ THE FOLLOWING AGREEMENT CAREFULLY.  BY COPYING, INSTALLING OR OTHERWISE USING SCGI-1.10 SOFTWARE, YOU ARE DEEMED TO HAVE AGREED TO THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THIS LICENSE AGREEMENT.\
1. This LICENSE AGREEMENT is between Corporation for National Research Initiatives, having an office at 1895 Preston White Drive, Reston, VA 20191 ("CNRI"), and the Individual or Organization ("Licensee") copying, installing or otherwise using scgi-1.10 software in source or binary form and its associated documentation ("scgi-1.10").\
2. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License Agreement, CNRI hereby grants Licensee a nonexclusive, royalty-free, world-wide license to reproduce, analyze, test, perform and/or display publicly, prepare derivative works, distribute, and otherwise use scgi-1.10 alone or in any derivative version, provided, however, that CNRI's License Agreement and CNRI's notice of copyright, i.e., "Copyright \'a9 2004 Corporation for National Research Initiatives; All Rights Reserved" are retained in scgi-1.10 alone or in any derivative version prepared by Licensee.\
3. In the event Licensee prepares a derivative work that is based on or incorporates scgi-1.10 or any part thereof, and wants to make the derivative work available to others as provided herein, then Licensee hereby agrees to include in any such work a brief summary of the changes made to scgi-1.10.\
4. CNRI is making scgi-1.10 available to Licensee on an "AS IS" basis.  CNRI MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED.  BY WAY OF EXAMPLE, BUT NOT LIMITATION, CNRI MAKES NO AND DISCLAIMS ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR THAT THE USE OF SCGI-1.10 WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY THIRD PARTY RIGHTS.\
5. CNRI SHALL NOT BE LIABLE TO LICENSEE OR ANY OTHER USERS OF SCGI-1.10 FOR ANY INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR LOSS AS A RESULT OF MODIFYING, DISTRIBUTING, OR OTHERWISE USING SCGI-1.10, OR ANY DERIVATIVE THEREOF, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY THEREOF.\
6. This License Agreement will automatically terminate upon a material breach of its terms and conditions.\
7. This License Agreement shall be governed by and interpreted in all respects by the law of the State of Virginia, excluding Virginia's conflict of law provisions.  Nothing in this License Agreement shall be deemed to create any relationship of agency, partnership, or joint venture between CNRI and Licensee.  This License Agreement does not grant permission to use CNRI trademarks or trade name in a trademark sense to endorse or promote products or services of Licensee, or any third party.\
8. By copying, installing or otherwise using scgi-1.10, Licensee agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of this License Agreement.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Josh Coalson ( FLAC )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005 Josh Coalson\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
- Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyrigh notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
- Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
- Neither the name of the Xiph.org Foundation nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Dave Coffin ( dcraw )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1997-2004 by Dave Coffin, dcoffin a cybercom o net\
This is a portable ANSI C program to convert raw image files from any digital camera into PPM format.  TIFF and CIFF parsing are based upon public specifications, but no such documentation is available for the raw sensor data, so writing this program has been an immense effort.  This code is freely licensed for all uses, commercial and otherwise.  Comments, questions, and encouragement are welcome.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b \cf0 Yann Collet ( LZ4 )
\b0 \
LZ4 - Fast LZ compression algorithm \
Copyright \'a9 2011-2012, Yann Collet. \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: \
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 David Corcoran ( Smartcard Services )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2000 David Corcoran <corcoran@linuxnet.com>. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement:  This product includes software developed by: David Corcoran <corcoran@linuxnet.com> http://www.linuxnet.com (MUSCLE).  4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b CPAN Perl Modules
\b0 \
aliased-0.30: Copyright \'a9 2005 by Curtis Poe. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Alien-wxWidgets: Copyright \'a9 2005, 2006 Mattia Barbon <mbarbon@cpan.org>.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Algorithm-C3-0.08: Copyright \'a9 2006 Infinity Interactive, Inc. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.iinteractive.com/"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc3 http://www.iinteractive.com}}\ul \ulc3 .\ulnone  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Algorithm-Diff-1.1902: Parts Copyright \'a9 2000-2004 Ned Konz. \'a0All rights reserved. \'a0Parts by Tye McQueen. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Archive-Tar: This module is Copyright \'a9 2002 Jos Boumans <kane@cpan.org>.  All rights reserved.  This library is free software; you may redistribute and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Archive-Zip: Copyright \'a9 2000-2003 Ned Konz. All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Authen-SASL: Copyright \'a9 1998-2005 Graham Barr. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
autobox-2.75: Copyright \'a9 2003-2011 chocolateboy <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:chocolate@cpan.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 chocolate@cpan.org}}>. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
bareword-filehandles-0.003: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsker. Licensed under the same terms as Perl: http://perldoc.perl.org/perlartistic.html http://perldoc.perl.org/perlgpl.html \
B-Hooks-EndOfScope-0.09: This software is copyright \'a9 2010 by Florian Ragwitz. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself. Terms of the Perl programming language system itself: a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option) any later version, or b) the "Artistic License" [version 1.0].\
B-Hooks-OP-Check-0.19: Copyright \'a9 2008 Florian Ragwitz. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
BerkeleyDB: Copyright \'a9 1997-2006 Paul Marquess. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Bit-Vector: Artistic License\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Capture-Tiny-0.23: This software is Copyright \'a9 2009 by David Golden. http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Carp-Clan: Artistic License\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Class-Accessor: Copyright \'a9 2006 Marty Pauley <marty+perl@kasei.com>.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. That means either (a) the GNU General Public License or (b) the Artistic License.\
Class-Accessor-Chained-0.01: Copyright \'a9 2003 Richard Clamp. \'a0All Rights Reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Class-Accessor-Grouped-0.10003: Copyright \'a9 2006-2010 Matt S. Trout <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:mst@shadowcatsystems.co.uk"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 mst@shadowcatsystems.co.uk}}>. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Class-C3-0.22: Copyright 2005, 2006 by Infinity Interactive, Inc. <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.iinteractive.com/"}}{\fldrslt \ul http://www.iinteractive.com}}>. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Class-C3-Componentised-1.001000: Copyright 2008-2011 Adam Kennedy. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Class-Inspector-1.25: Copyright 2002-2011 Adam Kennedy. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Class-Load-0.12: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Shawn M Moore. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Class-Load-XS-0.06: This software is Copyright \'a9 2012 by Dave Rolsky.\
Class-Method-Modifiers-1.10: Copyright 2007-2009 Shawn M Moore. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Class-MOP-1.00: Copyright \'a9 2006-2008 Infinity Interactive, Inc. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.iinteractive.com/"}}{\fldrslt \ul http://www.iinteractive.com}}\ul .\ulnone  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Class-Singleton-1.4: Copyright \'a9 Andy Wardley 1998-2007. All Rights Reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Class-Tiny-0.014: This software is Copyright \'a9 2013 by David Golden. http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Class-XSAccessor-1.12: Copyright \'a9 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 by Steffen Mueller. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Clone-0.31: Copyright \'a9 2001 Ray Finch. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Compress-Bzip2: Copyright \'a9 2005 Rob Janes. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.  \
Compress-Zlib: Copyright \'a9 1995-2006 Paul Marquess. All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.  \
Config-Any-0.23: Copyright \'a9 2006, Portugal Telecom "{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.sapo.pt/"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 http://www.sapo.pt/}}". All rights reserved. Portions copyright 2007, Joel Bernstein "<{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:rataxis@cpan.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 rataxis@cpan.org}}>". Licensed under the same terms as Perl. \
Context-Preserve-0.01: Copyright \'a9 2008 Infinity Interactive. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Convert-ASN1: Copyright \'a9 2000-2005 Graham Barr <gbar@pobox.com>. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Convert-BinHex: Copyright \'a9 1997 by Eryq.  All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. This software comes with NO WARRANTY of any kind. See the COPYING file in the distribution for details.\
Convert-BinHex: Copyright \'a9 1997 by Eryq.  All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Convert-TNEF: Copyright \'a9 1999 Douglas Wilson <dougw@cpan.org>. All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Convert-UUlib: This interface is distributed under the same license as perl itself, i.e. either the Artistic License (COPYING.Artistic) or the GPL (COPYING.GNU).  However, the uulib library itself (see the subdirectory uulib) is ONLY distributed under the GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE (COPYING.GNU). Depending on how you link it together (normally static) this makes the whole package fall under the GPL.  If you make modifications, please consider sending them to me, Marc Lehmann <schmorp@schmorp.de>\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 CPAN-Meta-2.120921: This software is copyright \'a9 2010 by David Golden and Ricardo Signes. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
CPAN-Meta-Check-0.004: This software is copyright \'a9 2012 by Leon Timmermans. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
CPAN-Meta-Requirements-2.122: This software is copyright \'a9 2010 by David Golden and Ricardo Signes. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
CPAN-Meta-YAML-0.008: This software is copyright \'a9 2010 by Adam Kennedy. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Crypt-OpenSSL-Random-0.04: Copyright \'a9 2007 Ian Robertson, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:iroberts@cpan.com"}}{\fldrslt \ul iroberts@cpan.com}}\ul . \ulnone a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option) any later version, or b) the "Artistic License".\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Crypt-OpenSSL-RSA-0.26: Copyright \'a9 2001-2005 Ian Robertson. \'a0Crypt::OpenSSL::RSA is free software; you may redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Data-Compare-1.22: Copyright \'a9 1999-2001 Fabien Tassin. All rights reserved. \'a0Some parts copyright 2003-2010 David Cantrell. Licensed under The Artistic License version 1.0.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Data-Dump-1.21: Copyright 1998-2010 Gisle Aas. Copyright 1996-1998 Gurusamy Sarathy. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Data-Dumper-Concise-2.020: Copyright \'a9 2010 the Data::Dumper::Concise AUTHOR and CONTRIBUTORS: AUTHOR mst - Matt S. Trout <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:mst@shadowcat.co.uk"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 mst@shadowcat.co.uk}}> head1 CONTRIBUTORS frew - Arthur Axel "fREW" Schmidt <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:frioux@gmail.com"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 frioux@gmail.com}}>. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Data-OptList-0.106: Copyright 2006-2007, Ricardo SIGNES. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Data-Page-2.02: Copyright \'a9 2000-8, Leon Brocard. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Date-Calc: Artistic License\
DateTime-0.70: This software is Copyright \'a9 2011 by Dave Rolsky. This is free software, licensed under:  The Artistic License 2.0 (GPL Compatible).\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 The Artistic License 2.0
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2000-2006, The Perl Foundation.\
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.\

\b Preamble
\b0 \
This license establishes the terms under which a given free software Package may be copied, modified, distributed, and/or redistributed. The intent is that the Copyright Holder maintains some artistic control over the development of that Package while still keeping the Package available as open source and free software.\
You are always permitted to make arrangements wholly outside of this license directly with the Copyright Holder of a given Package. If the terms of this license do not permit the full use that you propose to make of the Package, you should contact the Copyright Holder and seek a different licensing arrangement. \

\b Definitions
\b0 \
"Copyright Holder" means the individual(s) or organization(s) named in the copyright notice for the entire Package.\
"Contributor" means any party that has contributed code or other material to the Package, in accordance with the Copyright Holder's procedures.\
"You" and "your" means any person who would like to copy, distribute, or modify the Package.\
"Package" means the collection of files distributed by the Copyright Holder, and derivatives of that collection and/or of those files. A given Package may consist of either the Standard Version, or a Modified Version.\
"Distribute" means providing a copy of the Package or making it accessible to anyone else, or in the case of a company or organization, to others outside of your company or organization.\
"Distributor Fee" means any fee that you charge for Distributing this Package or providing support for this Package to another party. \'a0It does not mean licensing fees.\
"Standard Version" refers to the Package if it has not been modified, or has been modified only in ways explicitly requested by the Copyright Holder.\
"Modified Version" means the Package, if it has been changed, and such changes were not explicitly requested by the Copyright Holder. \
"Original License" means this Artistic License as Distributed with the Standard Version of the Package, in its current version or as it may be modified by The Perl Foundation in the future.\
"Source" form means the source code, documentation source, and configuration files for the Package.\
"Compiled" form means the compiled bytecode, object code, binary, or any other form resulting from mechanical transformation or translation of the Source form.\

\b Permission for Use and Modification Without Distribution
\b0 \
(1) \'a0You are permitted to use the Standard Version and create and use Modified Versions for any purpose without restriction, provided that you do not Distribute the Modified Version.\

\b Permissions for Redistribution of the Standard Version
\b0 \
(2) \'a0You may Distribute verbatim copies of the Source form of the Standard Version of this Package in any medium without restriction, either gratis or for a Distributor Fee, provided that you duplicate all of the original copyright notices and associated disclaimers. \'a0At your discretion, such verbatim copies may or may not include a Compiled form of the Package.\
(3) \'a0You may apply any bug fixes, portability changes, and other modifications made available from the Copyright Holder. \'a0The resulting Package will still be considered the Standard Version, and as such will be subject to the Original License.\

\b Distribution of Modified Versions of the Package as Source
\b0  \
(4) \'a0You may Distribute your Modified Version as Source (either gratis or for a Distributor Fee, and with or without a Compiled form of the Modified Version) provided that you clearly document how it differs from the Standard Version, including, but not limited to, documenting any non-standard features, executables, or modules, and provided that you do at least ONE of the following:\
(a) \'a0make the Modified Version available to the Copyright Holder of the Standard Version, under the Original License, so that the Copyright Holder may include your modifications in the Standard Version.\
(b) \'a0ensure that installation of your Modified Version does not prevent the user installing or running the Standard Version. In addition, the Modified Version must bear a name that is different from the name of the Standard Version.\
\'a9 \'a0allow anyone who receives a copy of the Modified Version to make the Source form of the Modified Version available to others under \
(i) \'a0the Original License or\
(ii) \'a0a license that permits the licensee to freely copy, modify and redistribute the Modified Version using the same licensing terms that apply to the copy that the licensee received, and requires that the Source form of the Modified Version, and of any works derived from it, be made freely available in that license fees are prohibited but Distributor Fees are allowed.\

\b Distribution of Compiled Forms of the Standard Version or Modified Versions without the Source
\b0 \
(5) \'a0You may Distribute Compiled forms of the Standard Version without the Source, provided that you include complete instructions on how to get the Source of the Standard Version. \'a0Such instructions must be\
valid at the time of your distribution. \'a0If these instructions, at any time while you are carrying out such distribution, become invalid, you must provide new instructions on demand or cease further distribution. If you provide valid instructions or cease distribution within thirty days after you become aware that the instructions are invalid, then you do not forfeit any of your rights under this license.\
(6) \'a0You may Distribute a Modified Version in Compiled form without the Source, provided that you comply with Section 4 with respect to the Source of the Modified Version.\

\b Aggregating or Linking the Package 
\b0 \
(7) \'a0You may aggregate the Package (either the Standard Version or Modified Version) with other packages and Distribute the resulting aggregation provided that you do not charge a licensing fee for the Package. \'a0Distributor Fees are permitted, and licensing fees for other components in the aggregation are permitted. The terms of this license apply to the use and Distribution of the Standard or Modified Versions as included in the aggregation.\
(8) You are permitted to link Modified and Standard Versions with other works, to embed the Package in a larger work of your own, or to build stand-alone binary or bytecode versions of applications that include the Package, and Distribute the result without restriction, provided the result does not expose a direct interface to the Package.\

\b Items That are Not Considered Part of a Modified Version
\b0  \
(9) Works (including, but not limited to, modules and scripts) that merely extend or make use of the Package, do not, by themselves, cause the Package to be a Modified Version. \'a0In addition, such works are not considered parts of the Package itself, and are not subject to the terms of this license.\

\b General Provisions
\b0 \
(10) \'a0Any use, modification, and distribution of the Standard or Modified Versions is governed by this Artistic License. By using, modifying or distributing the Package, you accept this license. Do not use, modify, or distribute the Package, if you do not accept this license.\
(11) \'a0If your Modified Version has been derived from a Modified Version made by someone other than you, you are nevertheless required to ensure that your Modified Version complies with the requirements of\
this license.\
(12) \'a0This license does not grant you the right to use any trademark, service mark, tradename, or logo of the Copyright Holder.\
(13) \'a0This license includes the non-exclusive, worldwide, free-of-charge patent license to make, have made, use, offer to sell, sell, import and otherwise transfer the Package with respect to any patent claims licensable by the Copyright Holder that are necessarily infringed by the Package. If you institute patent litigation (including a cross-claim or counterclaim) against any party alleging that the Package constitutes direct or contributory patent infringement, then this Artistic License to you shall terminate on the date that such litigation is filed.\
(14) \'a0Disclaimer of Warranty:\
THE PACKAGE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES. THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT ARE DISCLAIMED TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY YOUR LOCAL LAW. UNLESS REQUIRED BY LAW, NO COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTOR WILL BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THE PACKAGE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\fs24 \
DateTime-Locale-0.45: Copyright \'a9 2003 Richard Evans. Copyright \'a9 2004-2009 David Rolsky. All rights reserved. The locale modules in directory DateTime/Locale have been generated from data provided by the CLDR project, see LICENSE.cldr for details on the CLDR data's license. Terms of Perl itself: a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option) any later version, or b) the "Artistic License" [version 1.0].\

\fs20 UNICODE, INC. LICENSE AGREEMENT - DATA FILES AND SOFTWARE\
Unicode Data Files include all data files under the directories {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.unicode.org/Public/"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 http://www.unicode.org/Public/}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.unicode.org/reports/"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 http://www.unicode.org/reports/}}, and {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.unicode.org/cldr/data/"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 http://www.unicode.org/cldr/data/}} . Unicode Software includes any source code published in the Unicode Standard or under the directories {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.unicode.org/Public/"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 http://www.unicode.org/Public/}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.unicode.org/reports/"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 http://www.unicode.org/reports/}}, and {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.unicode.org/cldr/data/"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 http://www.unicode.org/cldr/data/}}.\
NOTICE TO USER: Carefully read the following legal agreement. BY DOWNLOADING, INSTALLING, COPYING OR OTHERWISE USING UNICODE INC.'S DATA FILES ("DATA FILES"), AND/OR SOFTWARE ("SOFTWARE"), YOU UNEQUIVOCALLY ACCEPT, AND AGREE TO BE BOUND BY, ALL OF THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THIS AGREEMENT. IF YOU DO NOT AGREE, DO NOT DOWNLOAD, INSTALL, COPY, DISTRIBUTE OR USE THE DATA FILES OR SOFTWARE.\
COPYRIGHT AND PERMISSION NOTICE\
Copyright \'a9 1991-2009 Unicode, Inc. All rights reserved. Distributed under the Terms of Use in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.unicode.org/copyright.html"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 http://www.unicode.org/copyright.html}}.
\fs24 \

\fs20 Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of the Unicode data files and any associated documentation (the "Data Files") or Unicode software and any associated documentation (the "Software") to deal in the Data Files or Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies of the Data Files or Software, and to permit persons to whom the Data Files or Software are furnished to do so, provided that (a) the above copyright notice(s) and this permission notice appear with all copies of the Data Files or Software, (b) both the above copyright notice(s) and this permission notice appear in associated documentation, and \'a9 there is clear notice in each modified Data File or in the Software as well as in the documentation associated with the Data File(s) or Software that the data or software has been modified.\
THE DATA FILES AND SOFTWARE ARE PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR HOLDERS INCLUDED IN THIS NOTICE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, OR ANY SPECIAL INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THE DATA FILES OR SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of a copyright holder shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in these Data Files or Software without prior written authorization of the copyright holder.
\fs24 \
DateTime-TimeZone-1.41: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Dave Rolsky. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
DBD-SQLite: This module is distributed under the same terms as Perl itself, and is copyright Matt Sergeant, 2002.\
DBI: The DBI module is Copyright \'a9 1994-2004 Tim Bunce, Ireland. All rights reserved. You may distribute under the terms of either the GNU General Public License or the Artistic License, as specified in the Perl README file.\
DBIx-Class-0.08195: Copyright \'a9 2005-2010 the DBIx::Class "AUTHOR" and "CONTRIBUTORS". AUTHOR mst: Matt S. Trout <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:mst@shadowcatsystems.co.uk"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 mst@shadowcatsystems.co.uk}}> (I mostly consider myself "project founder" these days but the AUTHOR heading is traditional :) 
\fs20 [Apple Note: \'a0For a list of CONTRIBUTORS, please see the README file included with the package]
\fs24 . Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Devel-Caller-2.05: Copyright \'a9 2002, 2003, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2010 Richard Clamp. All Rights Reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Devel-Declare-0.006007: Copyright \'a9 2007, 2008, 2009 Matt S Trout. Copyright \'a9 2008, 2009 Florian Ragwitz. stolen_chunk_of_toke.c based on toke.c from the perl core, which is Copyright \'a9 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, by Larry Wall and others. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Devel-PartialDump-0.15: Copyright \'a9 2008, 2009 Yuval Kogman. All rights reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Digest-HMAC: Copyright \'a9 1998-2001 Gisle Aas; Copyright \'a9 1998 Graham Barr. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Devel-GlobalDestruction-0.02: Copyright \'a9 2008 Yuval Kogman. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Devel-StackTrace-1.31: This software is Copyright \'a9 2014 by Dave Rolsky. http://opensource.org/licenses/Artistic-2.0 \
Digest-CRC-0.14: Oliver Maul, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:oli@42.nu"}}{\fldrslt \ul oli@42.nu}}\ul . \ulnone CRC algorithm code taken from "A PAINLESS GUIDE TO CRC ERROR DETECTION ALGORITHMS". The author of this package disclaims all copyrights and releases it into the public domain.\
Digest-SHA1: Copyright 1999-2004 Gisle Aas.  Copyright 1997 Uwe Hollerbach.  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.  \
Dist-CheckConflicts: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Jesse Luehrs. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself. Terms of the Perl programming language system itself a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option) any later version, or b) the "Artistic License".\
Encode-Detect-1.01: Version: MPL 1.1/GPL 2.0/LGPL 2.1. The contents of this file are subject to the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/"}}{\fldrslt \ul http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/}}\ul .\ulnone  Software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing rights and limitations under the License. The Original Code is Encode::Detect wrapper. The Initial Developer of the Original Code is Proofpoint, Inc. Portions created by the Initial Developer are Copyright \'a9 1998, 2001, 2005 the Initial Developer. All Rights Reserved. Contributor(s): Alternatively, the contents of this file may be used under the terms of either the GNU General Public License Version 2 or later (the "GPL"), or the GNU Lesser General Public License Version 2.1 or later (the "LGPL"), in which case the provisions of the GPL or the LGPL are applicable instead of those above. If you wish to allow use of your version of this file only under the terms of either the GPL or the LGPL, and not to allow others to use your version of this file under the terms of the MPL, indicate your decision by deleting the provisions above and replace them with the notice and other provisions required by the GPL or the LGPL. If you do not delete the provisions above, a recipient may use your version of this file under the terms of any one of the MPL, the GPL or the LGPL. [Apple note: \'a0Please refer to other places in this document for the text of the GPL v2 and the LGPL v2.1.]\

\b\fs20 GNU LESSER GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
\b0 \
Version 2.1, February 1999\
Copyright \'a9 1991, 1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.\
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301  USA\
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies\
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.\
[This is the first released version of the Lesser GPL.  It also counts\
 as the successor of the GNU Library Public License, version 2, hence\
 the version number 2.1.]\

\b Preamble
\b0 \
The licenses for most software are designed to take away your freedom to share and change it. By contrast, the GNU General Public Licenses are intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free software--to make sure the software is free for all its users.\
This license, the Lesser General Public License, applies to some specially designated software packages--typically libraries--of the Free Software Foundation and other authors who decide to use it. You can use it too, but we suggest you first think carefully about whether this license or the ordinary General Public License is the better strategy to use in any particular case, based on the explanations below.\
When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom of use, not price. Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for this service if you wish); that you receive source code or can get it if you want it; that you can change the software and use pieces of it in new free programs; and that you are informed that you can do these things.\
To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid distributors to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender these rights. These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you distribute copies of the library or if you modify it.\
For example, if you distribute copies of the library, whether gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that we gave you. You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code. If you link other code with the library, you must provide complete object files to the recipients, so that they can relink them with the library after making changes to the library and recompiling it. And you must show them these terms so they know their rights.\
We protect your rights with a two-step method: (1) we copyright the library, and (2) we offer you this license, which gives you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify the library.\
To protect each distributor, we want to make it very clear that there is no warranty for the free library. Also, if the library is modified by someone else and passed on, the recipients should know that what they have is not the original version, so that the original author's reputation will not be affected by problems that might be introduced by others.\
Finally, software patents pose a constant threat to the existence of any free program. We wish to make sure that a company cannot effectively restrict the users of a free program by obtaining a restrictive license from a patent holder. Therefore, we insist that any patent license obtained for a version of the library must be consistent with the full freedom of use specified in this license.\
Most GNU software, including some libraries, is covered by the ordinary GNU General Public License. This license, the GNU Lesser General Public License, applies to certain designated libraries, and is quite different from the ordinary General Public License. We use this license for certain libraries in order to permit linking those libraries into non-free programs.\
When a program is linked with a library, whether statically or using a shared library, the combination of the two is legally speaking a combined work, a derivative of the original library. The ordinary General Public License therefore permits such linking only if the entire combination fits its criteria of freedom. The Lesser General Public License permits more lax criteria for linking other code with the library.\
We call this license the "Lesser" General Public License because it does Less to protect the user's freedom than the ordinary General Public License. It also provides other free software developers Less of an advantage over competing non-free programs. These disadvantages are the reason we use the ordinary General Public License for many libraries. However, the Lesser license provides advantages in certain special circumstances.\
For example, on rare occasions, there may be a special need to encourage the widest possible use of a certain library, so that it becomes a de-facto standard. To achieve this, non-free programs must be allowed to use the library. A more frequent case is that a free library does the same job as widely used non-free libraries. In this case, there is little to gain by limiting the free library to free software only, so we use the Lesser General Public License.\
In other cases, permission to use a particular library in non-free programs enables a greater number of people to use a large body of free software. For example, permission to use the GNU C Library in non-free programs enables many more people to use the whole GNU operating system, as well as its variant, the GNU/Linux operating system.\
Although the Lesser General Public License is Less protective of the users' freedom, it does ensure that the user of a program that is linked with the Library has the freedom and the wherewithal to run that program using a modified version of the Library.\
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and modification follow. Pay close attention to the difference between a "work based on the library" and a "work that uses the library". The former contains code derived from the library, whereas the latter must be combined with the library in order to run.\

\b TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION
\b0 \

\b 0. 
\b0 This License Agreement applies to any software library or other program which contains a notice placed by the copyright holder or other authorized party saying it may be distributed under the terms of this Lesser General Public License (also called "this License"). Each licensee is addressed as "you".\
A "library" means a collection of software functions and/or data prepared so as to be conveniently linked with application programs (which use some of those functions and data) to form executables.\
The "Library", below, refers to any such software library or work which has been distributed under these terms. A "work based on the Library" means either the Library or any derivative work under copyright law: that is to say, a work containing the Library or a portion of it, either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated straightforwardly into another language. (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in the term "modification".)\
"Source code" for a work means the preferred form of the work for making modifications to it. For a library, complete source code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to control compilation and installation of the library.\
Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not covered by this License; they are outside its scope. The act of running a program using the Library is not restricted, and output from such a program is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the Library (independent of the use of the Library in a tool for writing it). Whether that is true depends on what the Library does and what the program that uses the Library does.\

\b 1. 
\b0 You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Library's complete source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty; and distribute a copy of this License along with the Library.\
You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee.\

\b 2. 
\b0 You may modify your copy or copies of the Library or any portion of it, thus forming a work based on the Library, and copy and distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1 above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:\
  a) The modified work must itself be a software library.\
  b) You must cause the files modified to carry prominent notices stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.\
  c) You must cause the whole of the work to be licensed at no charge to all third parties under the terms of this License.\
  d) If a facility in the modified Library refers to a function or a table of data to be supplied by an application program that uses the facility, other than as an argument passed when the facility is invoked, then you must make a good faith effort to ensure that, in the event an application does not supply such function or table, the facility still operates, and performs whatever part of its purpose remains meaningful. (For example, a function in a library to compute square roots has a purpose that is entirely well-defined independent of the application. Therefore, Subsection 2d requires that any application-supplied function or table used by this function must be optional: if the application does not supply it, the square root function must still compute square roots.)\
These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole. If identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Library, and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those sections when you distribute them as separate works. But when you distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based on the Library, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it.\
Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or collective works based on the Library.\
In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Library with the Library (or with a work based on the Library) on a volume of a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under the scope of this License.\

\b 3. 
\b0 You may opt to apply the terms of the ordinary GNU General Public License instead of this License to a given copy of the Library. To do this, you must alter all the notices that refer to this License, so that they refer to the ordinary GNU General Public License, version 2, instead of to this License. (If a newer version than version 2 of the ordinary GNU General Public License has appeared, then you can specify that version instead if you wish.) Do not make any other change in these notices.\
Once this change is made in a given copy, it is irreversible for that copy, so the ordinary GNU General Public License applies to all subsequent copies and derivative works made from that copy.\
This option is useful when you wish to copy part of the code of the Library into a program that is not a library.\

\b 4.
\b0  You may copy and distribute the Library (or a portion or derivative of it, under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange.\
If distribution of object code is made by offering access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent access to copy the source code from the same place satisfies the requirement to distribute the source code, even though third parties are not compelled to copy the source along with the object code.\

\b 5.
\b0  A program that contains no derivative of any portion of the Library, but is designed to work with the Library by being compiled or linked with it, is called a "work that uses the Library". Such a work, in isolation, is not a derivative work of the Library, and therefore falls outside the scope of this License.\
However, linking a "work that uses the Library" with the Library creates an executable that is a derivative of the Library (because it contains portions of the Library), rather than a "work that uses the library". The executable is therefore covered by this License. Section 6 states terms for distribution of such executables.\
When a "work that uses the Library" uses material from a header file that is part of the Library, the object code for the work may be a derivative work of the Library even though the source code is not. Whether this is true is especially significant if the work can be linked without the Library, or if the work is itself a library. The threshold for this to be true is not precisely defined by law.\
If such an object file uses only numerical parameters, data structure layouts and accessors, and small macros and small inline functions (ten lines or less in length), then the use of the object file is unrestricted, regardless of whether it is legally a derivative work. (Executables containing this object code plus portions of the Library will still fall under Section 6.)\
Otherwise, if the work is a derivative of the Library, you may distribute the object code for the work under the terms of Section 6. Any executables containing that work also fall under Section 6, whether or not they are linked directly with the Library itself.\

\b 6. 
\b0 As an exception to the Sections above, you may also combine or link a "work that uses the Library" with the Library to produce a work containing portions of the Library, and distribute that work under terms of your choice, provided that the terms permit modification of the work for the customer's own use and reverse engineering for debugging such modifications.\
You must give prominent notice with each copy of the work that the Library is used in it and that the Library and its use are covered by this License. You must supply a copy of this License. If the work during execution displays copyright notices, you must include the copyright notice for the Library among them, as well as a reference directing the user to the copy of this License. Also, you must do one of these things:\
  a) Accompany the work with the complete corresponding machine-readable source code for the Library including whatever changes were used in the work (which must be distributed under Sections 1 and 2 above); and, if the work is an executable linked with the Library, with the complete machine-readable "work that uses the Library", as object code and/or source code, so that the user can modify the Library and then relink to produce a modified executable containing the modified Library. (It is understood that the user who changes the contents of definitions files in the Library will not necessarily be able to recompile the application to use the modified definitions.)\
  b) Use a suitable shared library mechanism for linking with the Library. A suitable mechanism is one that (1) uses at run time a copy of the library already present on the user's computer system, rather than copying library functions into the executable, and (2) will operate properly with a modified version of the library, if the user installs one, as long as the modified version is interface-compatible with the version that the work was made with.\
  c) Accompany the work with a written offer, valid for at least three years, to give the same user the materials specified in Subsection 6a, above, for a charge no more than the cost of performing this distribution.\
  d) If distribution of the work is made by offering access to copy from a designated place, offer equivalent access to copy the above specified materials from the same place.\
  e) Verify that the user has already received a copy of these materials or that you have already sent this user a copy.\
For an executable, the required form of the "work that uses the Library" must include any data and utility programs needed for reproducing the executable from it. However, as a special exception, the materials to be distributed need not include anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component itself accompanies the executable.\
It may happen that this requirement contradicts the license restrictions of other proprietary libraries that do not normally accompany the operating system. Such a contradiction means you cannot use both them and the Library together in an executable that you distribute.\

\b 7.
\b0  You may place library facilities that are a work based on the Library side-by-side in a single library together with other library facilities not covered by this License, and distribute such a combined library, provided that the separate distribution of the work based on the Library and of the other library facilities is otherwise permitted, and provided that you do these two things:\
  a) Accompany the combined library with a copy of the same work based on the Library, uncombined with any other library facilities. This must be distributed under the terms of the Sections above.\
  b) Give prominent notice with the combined library of the fact that part of it is a work based on the Library, and explaining where to find the accompanying uncombined form of the same work.\

\b 8.
\b0  You may not copy, modify, sublicense, link with, or distribute the Library except as expressly provided under this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, link with, or distribute the Library is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License. However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance.\

\b 9. 
\b0 You are not required to accept this License, since you have not signed it. However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or distribute the Library or its derivative works. These actions are prohibited by law if you do not accept this License. Therefore, by modifying or distributing the Library (or any work based on the Library), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying the Library or works based on it.\

\b 10. 
\b0 Each time you redistribute the Library (or any work based on the Library), the recipient automatically receives a license from the original licensor to copy, distribute, link with or modify the Library subject to these terms and conditions. You may not impose any further restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein. You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties with this License.\

\b 11.
\b0  If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues), conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not excuse you from the conditions of this License. If you cannot distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may not distribute the Library at all. For example, if a patent license would not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Library by all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to refrain entirely from distribution of the Library.\
If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to apply, and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other circumstances.\
It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the integrity of the free software distribution system which is implemented by public license practices. Many people have made generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed through that system in reliance on consistent application of that system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot impose that choice.\
This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to be a consequence of the rest of this License.\

\b 12.
\b0  If the distribution and/or use of the Library is restricted in certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the original copyright holder who places the Library under this License may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among countries not thus excluded. In such case, this License incorporates the limitation as if written in the body of this License.\

\b 13.
\b0  The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of the Lesser General Public License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.\
Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Library specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and "any later version", you have the option of following the terms and conditions either of that version or of any later version published by the Free Software Foundation. If the Library does not specify a license version number, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software Foundation.\

\b 14.
\b0  If you wish to incorporate parts of the Library into other free programs whose distribution conditions are incompatible with these, write to the author to ask for permission. For software which is copyrighted by the Free Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes make exceptions for this. Our decision will be guided by the two goals of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.\
NO WARRANTY\

\b 15.
\b0  BECAUSE THE LIBRARY IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE LIBRARY, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW. EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE LIBRARY "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE LIBRARY IS WITH YOU. SHOULD THE LIBRARY PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.\

\b 16.
\b0  IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE LIBRARY AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE LIBRARY (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE LIBRARY TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER SOFTWARE), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.\

\b END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
\b0\fs24 \
Encode-Locale-1.02: \'a9 2010 Gisle Aas `<{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:gisle@aas.no"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 gisle@aas.no}}>`. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Error-0.17016: Copyright \'a9 1997-8 \'a0Graham Barr. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. Maintainer: Shlomi Fish <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:shlomif@iglu.org.il"}}{\fldrslt \ul shlomif@iglu.org.il}}>. \
Eval-Closure-0.06: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Jesse Luehrs. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
Expect: Copyright \'a9 1997 Austin Schutz; expect() interface & functionality enhancements \'a9 1999 Roland Giersig. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
ExtUtils-CBuilder: Copyright \'a9 2003-2005 Ken Williams.  All rights reserved.  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
ExtUtils-Config-0.007: This software is Copyright \'a9 2006 by Ken Williams, Leon Timmermans. Licensed under the same terms as Perl: http://perldoc.perl.org/perlartistic.html http://perldoc.perl.org/perlgpl.html \
ExtUtils-Depends-0.304: Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
ExtUtils-Helpers-0.021: This software is Copyright \'a9 2004 by Ken Williams, Leon Timmermans. Licensed under the same terms as Perl: http://perldoc.perl.org/perlartistic.html http://perldoc.perl.org/perlgpl.html \
ExtUtils-InstallPaths-0.010: This software is Copyright \'a9 2011 by Ken Williams, Leon Timmermans. Licensed under the same terms as Perl: http://perldoc.perl.org/perlartistic.html http://perldoc.perl.org/perlgpl.html\
ExtUtils-ParseXS: Copyright 2002-2003 Ken Williams. All rights reserved.  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.  Based on the ExtUtils::xsubpp code by Larry Wall and the Perl 5 Porters, which was released under the same license terms.\
File-Find-Rule-0.33: Copyright \'a9 2002, 2003, 2004, 2006, 2009, 2011 Richard Clamp. \'a0All Rights Reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
File-Listing-6.03: Copyright \'a9 1996-2010, Gisle Aas. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
File-Remove-1.51: Some parts copyright 2006 - 2011 Adam Kennedy. Some parts copyright 2004 - 2005 Richard Soderberg. Original copyright: 1998 by Gabor Egressy, <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:gabor@vmunix.com"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 gabor@vmunix.com}}>. Terms of Perl itself: a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option) any later version, or b) the "Artistic License" [version 1.0].\
File-Slurp: Copyright \'a9 2003 Uri Guttman <uri@stemsystems.com>.  Licensed the same as Perl.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 File-Which-1.09: Copyright 2002 Per Einar Ellefsen.  Some parts copyright 2009 Adam Kennedy. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Font-AFM-1.20: Copyright \'a9 1995-1998 Gisle Aas. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Geography-Countries-2009041301: Copyright \'a9 1999, 2009 by Abigail. Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
Getopt-ArgvFile-1.11: Copyright \'a9 1993-2007 Jochen Stenzel. All rights reserved. This module is free software, you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the Artistic License distributed with Perl version 5.003 or (at your option) any later version. Please refer to the Artistic License that came with your Perl distribution for more details. The Artistic License should have been included in your distribution of Perl. It resides in the file named "Artistic" at the top-level of the Perl source tree (where Perl was downloaded/unpacked - ask your system administrator if you don't know where this is). \'a0Alternatively, the current version of the Artistic License distributed with Perl can be viewed on-line on the World-Wide Web (WWW) from the following URL: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html}}\
Getopt-Long-Descriptive-0.090: This software is copyright \'a9 2005 by Hans Dieter Pearcey. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
GSSAPI: Copyright \'a9 2006 by Achim Grolms <perl@grolmsnet.de>.  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself, either Perl version 5.8.4 or, at your option, any later version of Perl 5 you may have available.\
Hash-Merge-0.12: Copyright \'a9 2001 Michael K. Neylon. All rights reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Hook-LexWrap-0.24: Copyright \'a9 2001, Damian Conway. All Rights Reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
HTML-Form-6.00: Copyright \'a9 1998-2008 Gisle Aas. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
HTML-Format-2.04: Copyright \'a9 1995-2002 Gisle Aas and Sean M. Burke. \'a0All rights reserved. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
HTML-Parser: Copyright \'a9 1995-2006 Gisle Aas. All rights reserved.  \'a9 1999-2000 Michael A. Chase.  All rights reserved.  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
HTML-Tagset: Copyright 1999, 2000 Sean M. Burke <sburke@cpan.org>; Copyright 1995-2000 Gisle Aas; all rights reserved.  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
HTML-Tree-3.23: Copyright \'a9 1995-1998 Gisle Aas; 1999-2004 Sean M. Burke; 2005 Andy Lester; 2006 Pete Krawczyk. \'a0(Except the articles contained in HTML::Tree::AboutObjects, HTML::Tree::AboutTrees, and HTML::Tree::Scanning, which are all copyright 2000 The Perl Journal.) Except for those three TPJ articles, the whole HTML-Tree distribution, of which this file is a part, is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. Those three TPJ articles may be distributed under the same terms as Perl itself. The programs in this library are distributed in the hope that they will be useful, but without any warranty; without even the implied warranty of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.\
HTTP-Cookies-6.00: Copyright 1997-2002 Gisle Aas. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
HTTP-Daemon-6.00: Copyright 1996-2003, Gisle Aas. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
HTTP-Date-6.00: Copyright 1995-1999, Gisle Aas. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
HTTP-Message-6.02: Copyright 1995-2008 Gisle Aas. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
HTTP-Negotiate-6.00: Copyright 1996,2001 Gisle Aas. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Import-Into-1.002000: Copyright \'a9 2012 mst - Matt S. Trout (cpan:MSTROUT) <mst@shadowcat.co.uk>, haarg - Graham Knop (cpan:HAARG) <haarg@haarg.org> Licensed under the same terms as Perl: http://perldoc.perl.org/perlartistic.html http://perldoc.perl.org/perlgpl.html\
indirect-0.31: Copyright \'a9 2008,2009,2010,2011,2012,2013 Vincent Pit, all rights reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl: http://perldoc.perl.org/perlartistic.html http://perldoc.perl.org/perlgpl.html\
Inline-0.46: Copyright \'a9 2000, 2001, 2002. Brian Ingerson. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. See {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html"}}{\fldrslt http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html}}\
Inline-Python-0.38: Copyright \'a9 2000, Neil Watkiss. All Rights Reserved. This module is free software. It may be used, redistributed and/or modified under the same terms as Perl itself. (see {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html"}}{\fldrslt http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html}})\
Inline-Struct-0.06: Copyright \'a9 2001, Neil Watkiss. This module is free software. It may be used, redistributed and/or modified under the same terms as Perl itself. (see {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html"}}{\fldrslt http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html}})\
Inline-Wrapper-0.05: Copyright \'a9 2008 Jason McManus (INFIDEL) <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:infidel@cpan.org"}}{\fldrslt infidel@cpan.org}}>. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Internals: Copyright \'a9 2001 by Steffen Beyer.  All rights reserved. This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself, i.e., under the terms of the "Artistic License" or the "GNU General Public License".\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 IO-HTML-0.04: This software is copyright \'a9 2012 by Christopher J. Madsen. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 IO-Socket-INET6: Copyright \'a9 2003- Rafael Martinez Torres <rafael.martinez@novagnet.com>; Copyright \'a9 2003- Euro6IX project; Copyright \'a9 1996-8 Graham Barr <gbar@pobox.com>. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. \
IO-Socket-SSL: Working support for non-blocking was added by Steffen Ullrich. The rewrite of this module is Copyright \'a9 2002-2005 Peter Behroozi. The original versions of this module are Copyright \'a9 1999-2002 Marko Asplund. This module is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
IO-String: Copyright 1998-2005 Gisle Aas.  <gisle@aas.no> This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
IO-Stty: Copyright 2007 Austin Schutz.  Licensed under the same terms as Perl itself.\
IO-Tty: Originally by Graham Barr <gbar@pobox.com>, based on the Ptty module by Nick Ing-Simmons <nik@tiuk.ti.com>. Now maintained and heavily rewritten by Roland Giersig <RGiersig@cpan.org>. Contains copyrighted stuff from openssh v3.0p1, authored by Tatu Ylonen <yio@cs.hut.fi>, Markus Friedl and Todd C. Miller <Todd.Miller@courtesan.com>. Now all code is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. Nevertheless the above AUTHORS retain their copyrights to the various parts and want to receive credit if their source code is used. See the source for details.\
IO-Zlib: Copyright \'a9 Tom Hughes <tom@compton.nu>.  All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
IO-stringy: Copyright \'a9 1996 by Eryq.  All rights reserved.  Copyright \'a9 1999,2001 by ZeeGee Software Inc.  All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
IP-Country-2.27: Copyright \'a9 2002-2005 Nigel Wetters Gourlay. All Rights Reserved. NO WARRANTY. This module is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. Some parts of this software distribution are derived from the APNIC, LACNIC, ARIN, AFRINIC and RIPE databases (copyright details below). I am not a lawyer, so please direct questions about the RIR's licenses to them, not me.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs20 \cf0 APNIC conditions of use\
The files are freely available for download and use on the condition that APNIC will not be held responsible for any loss or damage arising from the application of the information contained in these reports. APNIC endeavours to the best of its ability to ensure the accuracy of these reports; however, APNIC makes no guarantee in this regard. In particular, it should be noted that these reports seek to indicate the country where resources were first allocated or assigned. It is not intended that these reports be considered as an authoritative statement of the location in which any specific resource may currently be in use. \
ARIN database copyright\
Copyright \'a9 American Registry for Internet Numbers. All rights reserved. The ARIN WHOIS data is for Internet operational or technical research purposes pertaining to Internet operations only. \'a0It may not be used for advertising, direct marketing, marketing research, or similar purposes. Use of the ARIN WHOIS data for these activities is explicitly forbidden. ARIN requests to be notified of any such activities or suspicions thereof.\
RIPE database copyright\
The information in the RIPE Database is available to the public for agreed Internet operation purposes, but is under copyright. The copyright statement is: "Except for agreed Internet operational purposes, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission of the RIPE NCC on behalf of the copyright holders. Any use of this material to target advertising or similar activities is explicitly forbidden and may be prosecuted. The RIPE NCC requests to be notified of any such activities or suspicions thereof."\
LACNIC database copyright\
Copyright \'a9 Latin American and Caribbean IP address Regional Registry. All rights reserved.\
AFRINIC copyright\
Seems to be the RIPE copyright. I'm sure they'll correct this in due course.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\fs24 \cf0 IPC-Run3-0.045: Copyright 2003, R. Barrie Slaymaker, Jr., All Rights Reserved.  You may use this module under the terms of the BSD, Artistic, or GPL licenses, any version.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Lexical-SealRequireHints-0.007: Copyright \'a9 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012 Andrew Main (Zefram) <zefram@fysh.org> Licensed under the same terms as Perl: http://perldoc.perl.org/perlartistic.html http://perldoc.perl.org/perlgpl.html \
libwww-perl: Copyright \'a9 1995-2005 Gisle Aas. All rights reserved. Copyright \'a9 1995 Martijn Koster. All rights reserved. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
LWP-MediaTypes-6.01: Copyright \'a9 1995-1999 Gisle Aas. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
LWP-Protocol-https: Copyright \'a9 1997-2011s Gisle Aas. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Mac-AppleEvents-Simple: Copyright \'a9 1998-2005 Chris Nandor.  All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Mac-Apps-Launch: Copyright \'a9 1998-2004 Chris Nandor.  All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Mac-Carbon: Parts Copyright \'a9 1995 - 1997, 2002 Matthias Neeracher.  You may distribute under the terms of the Perl Artistic License, as specified in the README file;  Parts Copyright \'a9 1992-1999 Apple Computer, Inc.  All rights reserved.  You may incorporate this sample code into your applications without restriction, though the sample code has been provided "AS IS" and the responsibility for its operation is 100% yours.  However, what you are not permitted to do is to redistribute the source as "DSC Sample Code" after having made changes. If you're going to re-distribute the source, we require that you make it clear in the source that the code was descended from Apple Sample Code, but that you've made changes; Parts Copyright \'a9 1995-1999 Jim Luther and Apple Computer, Inc.  All rights reserved.  You may incorporate this sample code into your applications without restriction, though the sample code has been provided "AS IS" and the responsibility for its operation is 100% yours; Parts Copyright \'a9 2002 Matthias Neeracher, Chris Nandor.  You may distribute under the terms of the Perl Artistic License, as specified in the README file.\
Mac-Errors: Copyright 2002-2006, brian d foy, All rights reserved.  You can use this module under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Mac-Glue: Copyright \'a9 1998-2004 Chris Nandor.  All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Mac-OSA-Simple: Copyright \'a9 1998-2005 Chris Nandor.  All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Mail-DKIM-0.37: Copyright \'a9 2006-2009 by Messiah College. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself, either Perl version 5.8.6 or, at your option, any later version of Perl 5 you may have available. Jason Long <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:jlong@messiah.edu"}}{\fldrslt \ul jlong@messiah.edu}}>.\
Mail-SPF-v2.007: Copyright \'a9 2005-2009 Julian Mehnle <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:julian@mehnle.net"}}{\fldrslt \ul julian@mehnle.net}}>; copyright 2005\'a0Shevek <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:cpan@anarres.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul cpan@anarres.org}}>. All rights reserved. Mail::SPF is free software. \'a0You may use, modify, and distribute it under the terms of the BSD license. \'a0See LICENSE for the BSD license text. \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright\'a0notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the\'a0documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. The names of the authors may not be used to endorse or promote products\'a0derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS "AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Mail-SPF-Query: Released under the same terms as Perl, i.e. the GPL-2 and Artistic License.  Copyright \'a9 2003-2005 Meng Weng Wong <mengwong+spf@pobox.com> Contributions by various members of the SPF project <http://www.openspf.org>\
MailTools: All files contained in this installation are Copyright \'a9 1995-2003 Graham Barr unless otherwise specified. All rights reserved.  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Math-Round-0.06: Copyright \'a9 2002 Geoffrey Rommel. \'a0All rights reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
MIME-tools: Copyright \'a9 1996 by Eryq.  All rights reserved.  Copyright \'a9 1999 by ZeeGee Software Inc.  All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
MLDBM: Copyright \'a9 1995-98 Gurusamy Sarathy.  All rights reserved.  Copyright \'a9 1998 Raphael Manfredi.  Copyright \'a9 2002 Josh Chamas, Chamas Enterprises Inc.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Module-Build: Copyright \'a9 2001-2006 Ken Williams. All rights reserved.  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Module-Build-Tiny-0.034: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Leon Timmermans, David Golden. Licensed under the same terms as Perl: http://perldoc.perl.org/perlartistic.html http://perldoc.perl.org/perlgpl.html \
Module-Find-0.10: Copyright \'a9 2004-2010 Christian Renz <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:crenz@web42.com"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 crenz@web42.com}}>. All rights reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Module-Implementation-0.06: This software is Copyright \'a9 2012 by Dave Rolsky.\
Module-Metadata-1.000011: Original code Copyright \'a9 2001-2011 Ken Williams. Additional code Copyright \'a9 2010-2011 Matt Trout and David Golden. All rights reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Module-Pluggable: Copyright \'a9, 2003 Simon Wistow.  Distributed under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Module-Pluggable-3.9: Copyright \'a9, 2006 Simon Wistow. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Module-Runtime-0.011: Copyright \'a9 2004, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2010, 2011 Andrew Main (Zefram) <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:zefram@fysh.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 zefram@fysh.org}}>. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Module-ScanDeps-1.05: Copyright 2002-2008 by Audrey Tang <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:autrijus@autrijus.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 autrijus@autrijus.org}}>; 2005-2009 by Steffen Mueller <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:smueller@cpan.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 smueller@cpan.org}}>. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Moo-1.000005: Copyright \'a9 2010-2011 the Moo "AUTHOR" and "CONTRIBUTORS" as listed above. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Moose-1.01: Copyright \'a9 2006-2009 Infinity Interactive, Inc. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.iinteractive.com/"}}{\fldrslt \ul http://www.iinteractive.com}}\ul .\ulnone  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Moose-Autobox-0.11: Copyright \'a9 2006-2008 Infinity Interactive, Inc. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
MooseX-AuthorizedMethods-0.006: Copyright \'a9 2010 by Daniel Ruoso et al. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
MooseX-ClassAttribute-0.26: This software is Copyright \'a9 2011 by Dave Rolsky. This is free software, licensed under:  The Artistic License 2.0 (GPL Compatible)  
\fs20 [Apple Note:  Please see elsewhere in this document for a copy of the Artistic License 2.0]
\fs24 \
MooseX-Declare-0.35: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Florian Ragwitz. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
MooseX-Getopt-0.37: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Infinity Interactive, Inc. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
MooseX-LazyRequire-0.07: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Florian Ragwitz. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
MooseX-Method-Signatures-0.37: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Florian Ragwitz. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
MooseX-NonMoose-0.22: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Jesse Luehrs. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
MooseX-Role-Parameterized-0.27: Copyright \'a9 2007-2010 Infinity Interactive, Inc. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
MooseX-Singleton-0.27: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Shawn M Moore. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
MooseX-Storage-0.30: Copyright \'a9 2007-2008 Infinity Interactive, Inc. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
MooseX-StrictConstructor-0.16: This software is Copyright \'a9 2011 by Dave Rolsky. This is free software, licensed under: \'a0The Artistic License 2.0 (GPL Compatible) 
\fs20 [Apple Note:  Please see elsewhere in this document for a copy of the Artistic License 2.0]
\fs24 \
MooseX-Traits-0.11: Copyright 2008 Infinity Interactive, Inc. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
MooseX-TransactionalMethods-0.008: Copyright \'a9 2010 by Daniel Ruoso et al. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
MooseX-Types-0.30: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Robert "phaylon" Sedlacek. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
MooseX-Types-DateTime-0.05: Copyright \'a9 2008 Yuval Kogman. All rights reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
MooseX-Types-Structured-0.28: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by John Napiorkowski. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
Multidimensional-0.011: This software is copyright \'a9 2010 by Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsker. Licensed under the same terms as Perl: http://perldoc.perl.org/perlartistic.html http://perldoc.perl.org/perlgpl.html\
MRO-Compat-0.11: Copyright 2007-2008 Brandon L. Black <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:blblack@gmail.com"}}{\fldrslt \ul blblack@gmail.com}}>. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
namespace-autoclean-0.13: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Florian Ragwitz. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
namespace-clean-0.21: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Robert 'phaylon' Sedlacek. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Net-CIDR-Lite: This module is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.  Copyright \'a9 2001 Douglas Wilson <dougw@cpan.org>\
Net-DNS: Copyright \'a9 1997-2002 Michael Fuhr; Portions Copyright \'a9 2002-2004 Chris Reinhardt; Portions Copyright \'a9 2005 Olaf Kolkman (RIPE NCC); Portions Copyright \'a9 2005 Olaf Kolkman (NLnet Labs). All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you may redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Net-DNS-Resolver-Programmable-v0.003: Copyright \'a9 2006-2007 Julian Mehnle <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:julian@mehnle.net"}}{\fldrslt \ul julian@mehnle.net}}>. Net::DNS::Resolver::Programmable is free software. \'a0You may use, modify, and distribute it under the same terms as Perl itself, that is under the terms of either the GNU General Public License (version 2 or later) or the Artistic License. \'a0The complete text of these licenses follows. [Apple note: \'a0Please refer to other places in this document for the text of the GPL v2 and the Artistic License.]\
Net-HTTP-6.01: Copyright 2001-2003 Gisle Aas. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Net-IP: All files contained in this installation are Copyright \'a9 1999-2000 RIPE-NCC unless otherwise specified. All rights reserved. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Net-Server: Copyright \'a9 2001, Paul T Seamons (paul at seamons.com) http://seamons.com/ This package may be distributed under the terms of either the GNU General Public License or the Perl Artistic License All rights reserved.\
Net_SSLeay.pm: Copyright \'a9 1996-2002 Sampo Kellomaki <sampo@symlabs.com>; Copyright \'a9 2005 Florian Ragwitz <rafl@debian.org>; Copyright \'a9 2005 Mike McCauley <mikem@open.com.au>. All Rights Reserved. Distribution and use of this module is under the same terms as the OpenSSL package itself (i.e. free, but mandatory attribution; NO WARRANTY). Please consult LICENSE file in the root of the OpenSSL distribution.\
NetAddr-IP-4.027: Copyright \'a9 1999 - 2007 Luis E. Mu\'f1oz. Copyright \'a9 2006 - 2009 Michael A. Robinton. It can be used under the terms of the perl artistic license provided that proper credit for the work of the authors is preserved in the form \'a0of this copyright notice and license for this module. No warranty of any kind is \'a0expressed or implied. This code might make your computer go up in a puff of black smoke.\
Number-Compare-0.03: Copyright \'a9 2002,2011 Richard Clamp. \'a0All Rights Reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Package-Constants: Copyright \'a9 2008 Jos Boumans.  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. \
Package-DeprecationManager: This software is Copyright \'a9 2010 by Dave Rolsky. This is free software, licensed under: The Artistic License 2.0.\
Package-Stash, Package-Stash-XS: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Jesse Luehrs. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself. Terms of the Perl programming language system itself a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option) any later version, or b) the "Artistic License".\
PadWalker-1.92: Copyright \'a9 2000-2010, Robin Houston. All Rights Reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
PAR-1.002: Copyright 2002-2010 by Audrey Tang <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:cpan@audreyt.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 cpan@audreyt.org}}>. \'a0Copyright 2006-2010 by Steffen Mueller <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:smueller@cpan.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 smueller@cpan.org}}>. \'a0All rights reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
PAR-Dist-0.47: Copyright 2003-2009 by Audrey Tang <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:autrijus@autrijus.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 autrijus@autrijus.org}}>. \'a0All rights reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
PAR-Packer-1.010: Copyright 2002-2010 by Audrey Tang <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:cpan@audreyt.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 cpan@audreyt.org}}>. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Params-Classify-0.013: Copyright \'a9 2004, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2010 Andrew Main (Zefram) <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:zefram@fysh.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 zefram@fysh.org}}>. \'a0Copyright \'a9 2009, 2010 PhotoBox Ltd. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Params-Util-1.00: Copyright \'a9 2005 - 2009 Adam Kennedy. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Params-Validate-1.00: This software is Copyright \'a9 2011 by Dave Rolsky and Ilya Martynov. This is free software, licensed under:  The Artistic License 2.0 (GPL Compatible) 
\fs20 [Apple Note:  Please see elsewhere in this document for a copy of the Artistic License 2.0]
\fs24 \
parent-0.223: Copyright \'a9 2007 Max Maischein <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:corion@cpan.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul corion@cpan.org}}>. Based on the idea of C<base.pm>, which was introduced with Perl 5.004_04. This module is released under the same terms as Perl itself.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Parse-CPAN-Meta-1.4404: Copyright 2006 - 2010 Adam Kennedy. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Parse-Eyapp-1.181: Copyright \'a9 2006-2008 by Casiano Rodriguez-Leon. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Parse-Method-Signatures-1.003014: This distribution copyright 2008-2009, Ash Berlin <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:ash@cpan.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 ash@cpan.org}}>. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Parse-RecDescent-1.965001: Copyright \'a9 1997-2007, Damian Conway. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Path-Class-0.24: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Ken Williams. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
Perl6-Junction-1.40000: Copyright \'a9 2005, Carl Franks. \'a0All rights reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
PerlIO-gzip:  Copyright \'a9 2001-2004, 2006 Nicholas Clark.  You may distribute this work under the terms of either the GNU General Public License or the Artistic License, as specified in perl's README file.\
PerlIO-via-Bzip2:  Copyright \'a9 2005 by Arjen Laarhoven. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. \
perl-ldap: Copyright \'a9 1997-2004 Graham Barr. All rights reserved. This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Pod-Escapes: Copyright \'a9 2001-2004 Sean M. Burke.  All rights reserved.  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Pod-Readme: Copyright \'a9 2005,2006 Robert Rothenberg. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Pod-Simple: Copyright \'a9 2002 Sean M. Burke.  All rights reserved.  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
podlators: Copyright 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 Russ Allbery <rra@stanford.edu>.  This program is free software; you may redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
PPI-1.215: Copyright \'a9 2001 - 2011 Adam Kennedy. Terms of Perl itself:  a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option) any later version, or b) the "Artistic License" [version 1.0].\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Probe-Perl-0.01: Copyright \'a9 2005 Randy W. Sims. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Proc-Reliable:  All files contained in this installation are Copyright \'a9 2001-2002 Dan Goldwater unless otherwise specified. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Regexp-Common: Copyright \'a9 1997 - 2005, Damian Conway and Abigail. All Rights Reserved. This module is free software. It may be used, redistributed and/or modified under the terms of the Perl Artistic License (see http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html)\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Role-Tiny-1.002001. Copyright \'a9 2010-2012 the Role::Tiny mst - Matt S. Trout (cpan:MSTROUT) <mst@shadowcat.co.uk> dg - David Leadbeater (cpan:DGL) <dgl@dgl.cx> frew - Arthur Axel "fREW" Schmidt (cpan:FREW) <frioux@gmail.com> hobbs - Andrew Rodland (cpan:ARODLAND) <arodland@cpan.org> jnap - John Napiorkowski (cpan:JJNAPIORK) <jjn1056@yahoo.com> ribasushi - Peter Rabbitson (cpan:RIBASUSHI) <ribasushi@cpan.org> chip - Chip Salzenberg (cpan:CHIPS) <chip@pobox.com> ajgb - Alex J. G. Burzy\'c5ski (cpan:AJGB) <ajgb@cpan.org> doy - Jesse Luehrs (cpan:DOY) <doy at tozt dot net> perigrin - Chris Prather (cpan:PERIGRIN) <chris@prather.org> Mithaldu - Christian Walde (cpan:MITHALDU) <walde.christian@googlemail.com> ilmari - Dagfinn Ilmari Manns\'c3\'a5ker (cpan:ILMARI) <ilmari@ilmari.org> tobyink - Toby Inkster (cpan:TOBYINK) <tobyink@cpan.org> Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Scope-Guard-0.12: Copyright \'a9 2005-2010 by chocolateboy <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:chocolate@cpan.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul chocolate@cpan.org}}>. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself, either Perl version 5.8.6 or, at your option, any later version of Perl 5 you may have available.\
Socket6: Copyright \'a9 2000-2005 Hajimu UMEMOTO <ume@mahoroba.org>.  All rights reserved. Socket6.pm and Socket6.xs are based on perl5.005_55-v6-19990721 written by KAME Project. gai.h, getaddrinfo.c and getnameinfo.c are based on ssh-1.2.27-IPv6-1.5 written by KIKUCHI Takahiro <kick@kyoto.wide.ad.jp>. Copyright \'a9 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999 WIDE Project. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of the project nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE PROJECT AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE PROJECT OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS\
OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
SQL-Abstract-1.72: Copyright \'a9 2001-2007 Nathan Wiger <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:nwiger@cpan.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 nwiger@cpan.org}}>. All Rights Reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Strictures-1.004002: Copyright \'a9 2010 mst - Matt S. Trout (cpan:MSTROUT) <mst@shadowcat.co.uk> Licensed under the same terms as Perl.
\fs20 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\fs24 \cf0 String-RewritePrefix-0.006: This software is copyright \'a9 2010 by Ricardo Signes. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Sub-Exporter-0.982: Copyright \'a9 2006-2007, Ricardo SIGNES. \'a0This program is free software; \'a0you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Sub-Exporter-Progressive-0.001006: Copyright \'a9 2012 the Sub::Exporter::Progressive frew - Arthur Axel Schmidt (cpan:FREW) <frioux+cpan@gmail.com> ilmari - Dagfinn Ilmari Manns\'c3\'a5ker (cpan:ILMARI) <ilmari@ilmari.org> mst - Matt S. Trout (cpan:MSTROUT) <mst@shadowcat.co.uk> leont - Leon Timmermans (cpan:LEONT) <leont@cpan.org> Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Sub-Install-0.925: Copyright \'a9 2005-2006 Ricardo Signes, All Rights Reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Sub-Name-0.04: Copyright \'a9 2004, 2008 Matthijs van Duin. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. Matthijs van Duin <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:xmath@cpan.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul xmath@cpan.org}}>.\
Sub-Uplevel:  Original code Copyright \'a9 2001-2007 by Michael G. Schwern.  Additional code Copyright \'a9 2006-2008 by David A. Golden.  License terms of Perl itself.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Syntax-0.004: This software is copyright \'a9 2012 by Robert 'phaylon' Sedlacek. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Syntax-Keyword-Junction-0.003001: This software is copyright \'a9 2012 by Arthur Axel "fREW" Schmidt. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Sys-Hostname-Long: Copyright \'a9 2001,2004,2005 Scott Penrose. All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Task-Weaken-1.03: Copyright \'a9 2006 - 2009 Adam Kennedy. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Test-CheckDeps-0.002: This software is copyright \'a9 2011 by Leon Timmermans. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Test-Deep-0.108: Copyright 2003, 2004 by Fergal Daly {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:fergal@esatclear.ie"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 fergal@esatclear.ie}}. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Test-Differences-0.61: Copyright \'a9 2008 Curtis "Ovid" Poe. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Test-Exception: Copyright \'a9 2002-2007 Adrian Howard.  All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Test-Fatal: This software is copyright \'a9 2010 by Ricardo Signes. This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself. Terms of the Perl programming language system itself a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option) any later version, or b) the "Artistic License".\
Test-Object-0.07: Copyright 2005, 2006 Adam Kennedy. All rights reserved. Terms of Perl itself:  a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option) any later version, or b) the "Artistic License" [version 1.0].\
Test-Output-1.01: Copyright \'a9 2005 Shawn Sorichetti. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Test-Pod:  Copyright \'a9 2006 Andy Lester.  All Rights Reserved.  You may use, modify and distribute this package under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Test-Requires: Copyright 2008 - 2010 Adam Kennedy. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Test-Script-1.07: Copyright 2006 - 2009 Adam Kennedy. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Test-SubCalls-1.09: Copyright 2005 - 2009 Adam Kennedy. Terms of Perl itself:  a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option) any later version, or b) the "Artistic License" [version 1.0].\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Test-Tester-0.107: This module is copyright 2005 Fergal Daly <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:fergal@esatclear.ie"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 fergal@esatclear.ie}}>, some parts are based on other people's work. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Test-Trap-v0.2.2: Copyright \'a9 2006-2012 Eirik Berg Hanssen. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Test-use-ok-0.02: Copyright 2005, 2006 by Audrey Tang <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:cpan@audreyt.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc4 cpan@audreyt.org}}>. The "MIT" License: \'a0\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs20 \cf0 Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
\fs24 \
Test-Warn-0.23: Copyright 2002 by Janek Schleicher. \'a0Copyright 2007-2009 by Alexandr Ciornii. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Text-Balanced-2.02: Copyright 1997 - 2001 Damian Conway. All Rights Reserved. \'a0Some (minor) parts copyright 2009 Adam Kennedy. This module is free software. It may be used, redistributed and/or\'a0modified under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Text-Diff-1.41: Some parts copyright 2009 Adam Kennedy. \'a0Copyright 2001 Barrie Slaymaker. All Rights Reserved. Terms of Perl itself:  a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option) any later version, or b) the "Artistic License" [version 1.0].\
Text-Glob-0.09: Copyright \'a9 2002, 2003, 2006, 2007 Richard Clamp. \'a0All Rights Reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Time-Epoch: Copyright \'a9 2000-2003 Chris Nandor.  All rights reserved.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the Artistic License, distributed with Perl.\
Time-Progress:  Copyright \'a9 2001-2009 Vladi Belperchinov-Shabanski <cade@biscom.net> This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Tree-DAG_Node-1.06: Copyright 1998-2001, 2004, 2007 by Sean M. Burke and David Hand. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
UNIVERSAL-require:  Copyright \'a9 2001, 2005 by Michael G. Schwern.  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. \
Unix-Syslog: Copyright \'a9 1999,2000,2001,2002 Marcus Harnisch <marcus.harnisch@gmx.net> This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the Artistic License. A copy of the license (see file Artistic in this directory) must be included in the package.\
URI: Copyright 1998-2003 Gisle Aas.  Copyright 1998 Graham Barr.  This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Variable-Magic-0.47: Copyright 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 Vincent Pit, all rights reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
version: This module can be distributed under the same terms as Perl.  Copyright \'a9 2004,2005,2006 John PeacockWWW-RobotRules-6.01: Copyright 1995-2009, Gisle Aas. \'a0Copyright 1995, Martijn Koster. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
Wx-Demo: Copyright \'a9 2000-2006 Mattia Barbon.  This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
Wx: Copyright \'a9 2000-2006 Mattia Barbon.  This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
XML-LibXML:  This is free software, you may use it and distribute it under the same terms as Perl itself. Copyright 2001-2003 AxKit.com Ltd, All rights reserved.\
XML-LibXML-Common: XML::LibXML::Common is dual licensed under the same terms as Perl itself. This means at your choice, either the Perl Artistic License, or the GNU GPL version 1 or higher.\
XML-LibXSLT-1.70: Copyright \'a9 2001 AxKit.com Ltd. This is free software, you may use it and distribute it under the same terms as Perl itself. \
XML-NamespaceSupport: Copyright \'a9 2001-2005 Robin Berjon. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
XML-Parser: Copyright \'a9 1998-2000 Larry Wall and Clark Cooper. All rights reserved. This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
XML-SAX: XML::SAX is dual licensed under the same terms as Perl itself. This means at your choice, either the Perl Artistic License, or the GNU GPL version 1 or higher.\
XML-SAX-Base-1.08: Copyright 2011 Grant McLean. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 XML-SAX-Expat-0.40: Copyright \'a9 2001-2008 Robin Berjon. All rights reserved. Licensed under the same terms as Perl.\
XML-Simple: Copyright \'a9 1999-2004 Grant McLean <grantm@cpan.org>. This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 XML-Writer-0.612: Copyright \'a9 1999 by Megginson Technologies. Copyright \'a9 2003 Ed Avis <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:ed@membled.com"}}{\fldrslt ed@membled.com}}>. Copyright \'a9 2004-2010 Joseph Walton <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:joe@kafsemo.org"}}{\fldrslt joe@kafsemo.org}}>. Redistribution and use in source and compiled forms, with or without modification, are permitted under any circumstances. \'a0No warranty.\
XML-XPath: This module is Copyright \'a9 2000 AxKit.com Ltd. This is free software, and as such comes with NO WARRANTY. No dates are used in this module. You may distribute this module under the terms of either the Gnu GPL, or the Artistic License (the same terms as Perl itself).
\fs20 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b\fs24 \cf0 Creative Labs ( OpenAL )
\b0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Copyright \'a9  1999-2000 by authors (Creative Labs, Inc.) \
This library is licensed under the terms of the GNU Library General Public License, Version 2 (LGPL). You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the OpenAL software under the terms of LGPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple.  The OpenAL software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the LGPL for more details; a copy of the LGPL is included with this product.  OpenAL is used with the following clarification from Creative Labs:  If any proprietary code links to OpenAL or is linked from OpenAL, but remains an independent and separate work in that none of the OpenAL code is statically linked to the proprietary code, there is no obligation to open source such proprietary code or to allow users to reverse engineer the proprietary code.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 GNU LIBRARY GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
\b0 \
Version 2, June 1991
\fs24 \

\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU Library General Public License, please refer to the Easy Software Products (CUPS) attribution, where a copy of the LGPL is included]
\fs24 \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Ian F. Darwin ( file )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1987 Ian F. Darwin.  Written by Ian F. Darwin.\
This software is not subject to any license of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company or of the Regents of the University of California.  Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose on any computer system, and to alter it and redistribute it freely, subject to the following restrictions:  1. The author is not responsible for the consequences of use of this software, no matter how awful, even if they arise from flaws in it. 2. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented, either by explicit claim or by omission.  Since few users ever read sources, credits must appear in the documentation. 3. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be misrepresented as being the original software.  Since few users ever read sources, credits must appear in the documentation. 4. This notice may not be removed or altered.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b \cf0 Davi de Castro Reis, et al. ( cmph )
\b0\fs20 \
\pard\pardeftab720

\fs24 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2012, Davi de Castro Reis, Djamel Belazzougui, Fabiano Cupertino Botelho and Nivio Ziviani \
The code of the cmph library is dual licensed under the LGPL version 2 and MPL 1.1 licenses. Please refer to the LGPL-2 and MPL-1.1 files in the repository for the full description of each of the licenses.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Christopher G. Demetriou, Semen Ustimenko ( ntfs )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1994 Christopher G. Demetriou, Copyright \'a9 1999 Semen Ustimenko. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by Christopher G. Demetriou.\
4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF\'a0THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Frank Denis ( dnscrypt-proxy, libsodium )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 dnscrypt-proxy is covered by the following license :\
Copyright \'a9 2011-2017 Frank Denis <j at pureftpd dot org>\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above\
copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
====\
This license applies to all parts of dnscrypt-proxy that are not externally maintained libraries.\
The externally maintained libraries used by dnscrypt-proxy are:\
  - libsodium (https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium). 2-clause BSD license. Based on NaCl (http://nacl.cr.yp.to), public domain. See src/libsodium/\{COPYING,AUTHORS\}.\
  - libevent (http://libevent.org/). 3-clause BSD license. See src/libevent/LICENSE.\
libsodium:\
Copyright \'a9 2013-2016 Frank Denis <j at pureftpd dot org>\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above\
copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Deusty ( CocoaHTTPServer )
\b0 \
Software License Agreement (BSD License)\
Copyright \'a9 2011, Deusty, LLC. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use of this software in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Neither the name of Deusty nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission of Deusty, LLC.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Thomas E. Dickey ( diffstat )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1994, 1995, 1996, 1998 by Thomas E. Dickey <dickey@clark.net>. All rights reserved.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of the above listed copyright holder(s) not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.\
THE ABOVE LISTED COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE LISTED COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Digital Equipment Corporation ( bind, BSD kernel )
\b0 \
Portions Copyright \'a9 1993 by Digital Equipment Corporation.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies, and that the name of Digital Equipment Corporation not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the document or software without specific, written prior permission.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS AND DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP. DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS.  IN NO EVENT SHALL DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORPORATION BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Divisible by Zero ( Cocoa XML-RPC )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Cocoa XML-RPC Client Framework\
XMLRPCConnection.m\
Created by Eric J. Czarny on Thu Jan 15 2004.  Copyright \'a9 2004 Divisible by Zero.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Paul R. Dixon et al. ( OpenDcd )
\b0 \
Copyright 2013 Paul R. Dixon\
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. \
You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
THIS CODE IS PROVIDED *AS IS* BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION ANY IMPLIED // WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF TITLE, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, MERCHANTABLITY OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.\
See the Apache 2 License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.\
\

\b The Dojo Foundation ( RequireJS )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2010-2013, The Dojo Foundation \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Greg Douglas, el at. ( RTreeTemplate )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1983 Antonin Guttman and Michael Stonebraker, UC Berkeley, Copyright \'a9 1994 Melinda Green, Copyright \'a9 1995 Paul Brook, Copyright \'a9 2004 Greg Douglas \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Giacomo Drago ( minijson )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2015, Giacomo Drago <giacomo@giacomodrago.com>  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of Giacomo Drago nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY GIACOMO DRAGO "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL GIACOMO DRAGO BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Dragonfly Project ( ALTQ FAIRQ code )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2008 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.\
This code is derived from software contributed to The DragonFly Project by Matthew Dillon <dillon@backplane.com>\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific, prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Paul Dubois
\b0  
\b ( RTF Tools )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1994 Paul Dubois.  \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Easy Software Products, Apple Inc. ( CUPS )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1997-2007 by Easy Software Products; Copyright \'a9 2007-2011 Apple Inc.. All rights reserved. \
For versions of CUPS up to CUPS v.1.3.0 - These coded instructions, statements, and computer programs are the property of Easy Software Products (since acquired by Apple Inc.) and are protected by Federal copyright law.  Distribution and use rights are outlined in the file "LICENSE.txt" which should have been included with this file.  PostScript is a trademark of Adobe Systems, Inc. \

\b \'95 Common UNIX Printing System License Agreement 
\b0 \

\b INTRODUCTION 
\b0 \
The Common UNIX Printing System
\fs18 \super TM
\fs24 \nosupersub  , (CUPS
\fs18 \super TM
\fs24 \nosupersub  ), is provided under the GNU General Public License (GPL) and GNU Library General Public License (LGPL), Version 2, with exceptions for Apple operating systems. A copy of the exceptions and licenses follow this introduction.  \
The GNU LGPL applies to the CUPS API library, located in the cups subdirectory of the CUPS source distribution and in the /usr/include/cups directory and libcups.a, libcups_s.a, libcups.sl, libcups.so, or libcups.dylib files in the binary distributions. \
The GNU GPL applies to the remainder of the CUPS distribution, including the pstoraster filter which is based upon GNU Ghostscript 5.50 and the pdftops filter which is based upon Xpdf 0.93a. \
For those not familiar with the GNU GPL, the license basically allows you to: \
   - Use the CUPS software at no charge. \
   - Distribute verbatim copies of the software in source or binary form. \
   - Sell verbatim copies of the software for a media fee, or sell support for the software. \
   - Distribute or sell printer drivers and filters that use CUPS so long as source code is made available under the GPL.\
What this license does not allow you to do is make changes or add features to CUPS and then sell a binary distribution without source code. You must provide source for any new drivers, changes, or additions to the software, and all code must be provided under the GPL or LGPL as appropriate. The only exceptions to this are the portions of the CUPS software covered by the Apple operating system license \
exceptions outlined later in this license agreement. \
The GNU LGPL relaxes the link-to restriction, allowing you to develop applications that use the CUPS API library under other licenses and/or conditions as appropriate for your application. \

\b APPLE OPERATING SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT LICENSE EXCEPTION 
\b0 \
In addition, as the copyright holder of CUPS, Easy Software Products grants the following special exception: \
Software that is developed by any person or entity for an Apple Operating System (Apple OS-Developed Software), including but not limited to Apple and third party printer drivers, filters, and backends for an Apple Operating System, that is linked to the CUPS imaging library or based on any sample filters or backends provided with CUPS shall not be considered to be a derivative work or collective work based on the CUPS program and is exempt from the mandatory source code release clauses of the GNU GPL. You may therefore distribute linked combinations of the CUPS imaging library with Apple OS-Developed Software without releasing the source code of the Apple OS-Developed Software. You may also use sample filters and backends provided with CUPS to develop Apple OS-Developed Software without releasing the source code of the Apple OS-Developed Software. \
An Apple Operating System means any operating system software developed and/or marketed by Apple Computer, Inc., including but not limited to all existing releases and versions of Apple's Darwin, Mac OS X, and Mac OS X Server products and all follow-on releases and future versions thereof. \
This exception is only available for Apple OS-Developed Software and does not apply to software that is distributed for use on other operating systems.  All CUPS software that falls under this license exception have the following text at the top of each source file:   This file is subject to the Apple OS-Developed Software exception.\

\b TRADEMARKS 
\b0 \
Easy Software Products has trademarked the Common UNIX Printing System, CUPS, and CUPS logo. These names and logos may be used freely in any direct port or binary distribution of CUPS. To use them in derivative products, \
please contract Easy Software Products for written permission. Our intention is to protect the value of these trademarks and ensure that any derivative product meets the same high-quality standards as the original. \

\b BINARY DISTRIBUTION RIGHTS 
\b0 \
Easy Software Products also sells rights to the CUPS source code under a binary distribution license for vendors that are unable to release source code for their drivers, additions, and modifications to CUPS under the GNU GPL and LGPL. For information please contact us at the address shown above. \
The Common UNIX Printing System provides a pstoraster filter that utilizes the GNU GhostScript 5.50 core to convert PostScript files into a stream of raster images. For binary distribution licensing of this software, please contact: \
Miles Jones, Director of Marketing, Artifex Software Inc. , 454 Las Gallinas Ave., Suite 108, San Rafael, CA 94903, USA.  Voice: +1.415.492.9861  Fax: +1.415.492.9862  EMail: info@arsoft.com \
The pdftops filter is based on the Xpdf 0.93a software. For binary distribution licensing of this software, please contact:   Derek B. Noonburg  Email: derekn@foolabs.com   WWW: http://www.foolabs.com/xpdf/ \

\b SUPPORT 
\b0 \
Easy Software Products sells software support for CUPS as well as a commercial printing product based on CUPS called ESP Print Pro. You can find out more at our web site:  http://www.easysw.com \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE\
Version 2, June 1991 \

\b0 [Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU GPL Version 2, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]
\fs24 \

\b\fs20 GNU LIBRARY GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE\
Version 2, June 1991 
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc. \
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA \
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing it is not allowed. \
[This is the first released version of the library GPL.  It is numbered 2 because it goes with version 2 of the ordinary GPL.] \

\b Preamble 
\b0 \
The licenses for most software are designed to take away your freedom to share and change it.  By contrast, the GNU General Public Licenses are intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free software--to make sure the software is free for all its users. This license, the Library General Public License, applies to some specially designated Free Software Foundation software, and to any other libraries whose authors decide to use it.  You can use it for your libraries, too. \
When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for this service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new free programs; and that you know you can do these things. \
To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights. These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you distribute copies of the library, or if you modify it. \
For example, if you distribute copies of the library, whether gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that we gave you.  You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code.  If you link a program with the library, you must provide complete object files to the recipients so that they can relink them with the library, after making changes to the library and recompiling it.  And you must show them these terms so they know their rights. Our method of protecting your rights has two steps: (1) copyright the library, and (2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify the library. \
Also, for each distributor's protection, we want to make certain that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free library.  If the library is modified by someone else and passed on, we want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original version, so that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original authors' reputations. \
Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software patents.  We wish to avoid the danger that companies distributing free software will individually obtain patent licenses, thus in effect transforming the program into proprietary software.  To prevent this, we have made it clear that any patent must be licensed for everyone's free use or not licensed at all. \
Most GNU software, including some libraries, is covered by the ordinary GNU General Public License, which was designed for utility programs.  This license, the GNU Library General Public License, applies to certain designated libraries.  This license is quite different from the ordinary one; be sure to read it in full, and don't assume that anything in it is the same as in the ordinary license. \
The reason we have a separate public license for some libraries is that they blur the distinction we usually make between modifying or adding to a program and simply using it.  Linking a program with a library, without changing the library, is in some sense simply using the library, and is analogous to running a utility program or application program.  However, in a textual and legal sense, the linked executable is a combined work, a derivative of the original library, and the ordinary General Public License treats it as such. \
Because of this blurred distinction, using the ordinary General Public License for libraries did not effectively promote software sharing, because most developers did not use the libraries.  We concluded that weaker conditions might promote sharing better. \
However, unrestricted linking of non-free programs would deprive the users of those programs of all benefit from the free status of the libraries themselves.  This Library General Public License is intended to permit developers of non-free programs to use free libraries, while preserving your freedom as a user of such programs to change the free libraries that are incorporated in them.  (We have not seen how to achieve this as regards changes in header files, but we have achieved it as regards changes in the actual functions of the Library.)  The hope is that this will lead to faster development of free libraries. \
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and modification follow.  Pay close attention to the difference between a work based on the library and a work that uses the library.  The former contains code derived from the library, while the latter only works together with the library. \
Note that it is possible for a library to be covered by the ordinary General Public License rather than by this special one. \

\b GNU LIBRARY GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE \
TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION
\b0  \
 
\b 0.
\b0  This License Agreement applies to any software library which contains a notice placed by the copyright holder or other authorized party saying it may be distributed under the terms of this Library General Public License (also called this License).  Each licensee is addressed as you. \
A library means a collection of software functions and/or data prepared so as to be conveniently linked with application programs (which use some of those functions and data) to form executables. \
The Library, below, refers to any such software library or work which has been distributed under these terms.  A work based on the Library means either the Library or any derivative work under copyright law: that is to say, a work containing the Library or a portion of it, either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated straightforwardly into another language.  (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in the term modification.) Source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for making modifications to it.  For a library, complete source code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to control compilation and installation of the library. Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not covered by this License; they are outside its scope.  The act of running a program using the Library is not restricted, and output from such a program is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the Library (independent of the use of the Library in a tool for writing it).  Whether that is true depends on what the Library does and what the program that uses the Library does. \

\b 1. 
\b0 You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Library's complete source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty; and distribute a copy of this License along with the Library. \
You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee. \

\b 2. 
\b0 You may modify your copy or copies of the Library or any portion of it, thus forming a work based on the Library, and copy and distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1 above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions: \

\b a)
\b0  The modified work must itself be a software library. \

\b b) 
\b0 You must cause the files modified to carry prominent notices stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.       \

\b c)
\b0  You must cause the whole of the work to be licensed at no charge to all third parties under the terms of this License. \

\b d)
\b0  If a facility in the modified Library refers to a function or a table of data to be supplied by an application program that uses the facility, other than as an argument passed when the facility is invoked, then you must make a good faith effort to ensure that, in the event an application does not supply such function or table, the facility still operates, and performs whatever part of its purpose remains meaningful. \
(For example, a function in a library to compute square roots has a purpose that is entirely well-defined independent of the application.  Therefore, Subsection 2d requires that any application-supplied function or table used by this function must be optional: if the application does not supply it, the square root function must still compute square roots.) \
These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole.  If identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Library, and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those sections when you distribute them as separate works.  But when you distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based on the Library, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it. \
Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or collective works based on the Library. \
In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Library with the Library (or with a work based on the Library) on a volume of a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under the scope of this License. \

\b 3. 
\b0 You may opt to apply the terms of the ordinary GNU General Public License instead of this License to a given copy of the Library.  To do this, you must alter all the notices that refer to this License, so that they refer to the ordinary GNU General Public License, version 2, instead of to this License.  (If a newer version than version 2 of the ordinary GNU General Public License has appeared, then you can specify that version instead if you wish.)  Do not make any other change in these notices. \
Once this change is made in a given copy, it is irreversible for that copy, so the ordinary GNU General Public License applies to all subsequent copies and derivative works made from that copy.  This option is useful when you wish to copy part of the code of the Library into a program that is not a library. \

\b 4. 
\b0 You may copy and distribute the Library (or a portion or derivative of it, under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange. \
If distribution of object code is made by offering access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent access to copy the source code from the same place satisfies the requirement to distribute the source code, even though third parties are not compelled to copy the source along with the object code. \

\b 5. 
\b0 A program that contains no derivative of any portion of the Library, but is designed to work with the Library by being compiled or linked with it, is called a work that uses the Library.  Such a work, in isolation, is not a derivative work of the Library, and therefore falls outside the scope of this License. \
However, linking a work that uses the Library with the Library creates an executable that is a derivative of the Library (because it contains portions of the Library), rather than a work that uses the library.  The executable is therefore covered by this License. Section 6 states terms for distribution of such executables. \
When a work that uses the Library uses material from a header file that is part of the Library, the object code for the work may be a derivative work of the Library even though the source code is not. Whether this is true is especially significant if the work can be linked without the Library, or if the work is itself a library.  The threshold for this to be true is not precisely defined by law. \
If such an object file uses only numerical parameters, data structure layouts and accessors, and small macros and small inline functions (ten lines or less in length), then the use of the object file is unrestricted, regardless of whether it is legally a derivative work.  (Executables containing this object code plus portions of the Library will still fall under Section 6.)  Otherwise, if the work is a derivative of the Library, you may distribute the object code for the work under the terms of Section 6. Any executables containing that work also fall under Section 6, whether or not they are linked directly with the Library itself. \

\b 6. 
\b0 As an exception to the Sections above, you may also compile or link a work that uses the Library with the Library to produce a work containing portions of the Library, and distribute that work under terms of your choice, provided that the terms permit modification of the work for the customer's own use and reverse engineering for debugging such modifications. You must give prominent notice with each copy of the work that the Library is used in it and that the Library and its use are covered by this License.  You must supply a copy of this License.  If the work during execution displays copyright notices, you must include the copyright notice for the Library among them, as well as a reference directing the user to the copy of this License.  Also, you must do one of these things: \

\b a) 
\b0 Accompany the work with the complete corresponding machine-readable source code for the Library including whatever changes were used in the work (which must be distributed under Sections 1 and 2 above); and, if the work is an executable linked with the Library, with the complete machine-readable work that uses the Library, as object code and/or source code, so that the user can modify the Library and then relink to produce a modified executable containing the modified Library.  (It is understood that the user who changes the contents of definitions files in the Library will not necessarily be able to recompile the application to use the modified definitions.) \

\b b) 
\b0 Accompany the work with a written offer, valid for at least three years, to give the same user the materials specified in Subsection 6a, above, for a charge no more than the cost of performing this distribution. \

\b c) 
\b0 If distribution of the work is made by offering access to copy from a designated place, offer equivalent access to copy the above specified materials from the same place. \

\b d) 
\b0 Verify that the user has already received a copy of these materials or that you have already sent this user a copy. \
For an executable, the required form of the work that uses the Library must include any data and utility programs needed for reproducing the executable from it.  However, as a special exception, the source code distributed need not include anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component itself accompanies the executable. \
It may happen that this requirement contradicts the license restrictions of other proprietary libraries that do not normally accompany the operating system.  Such a contradiction means you cannot use both them and the Library together in an executable that you distribute. \

\b 7.
\b0  You may place library facilities that are a work based on the Library side-by-side in a single library together with other library facilities not covered by this License, and distribute such a combined library, provided that the separate distribution of the work based on the Library and of the other library facilities is otherwise permitted, and provided that you do these two things: \

\b a)
\b0  Accompany the combined library with a copy of the same work based on the Library, uncombined with any other library     facilities.  This must be distributed under the terms of the Sections above. \

\b b)
\b0  Give prominent notice with the combined library of the fact that part of it is a work based on the Library, and explaining where to find the accompanying uncombined form of the same work. \

\b 8.
\b0  You may not copy, modify, sublicense, link with, or distribute the Library except as expressly provided under this License.  Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, link with, or distribute the Library is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.  However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance. \

\b 9.
\b0  You are not required to accept this License, since you have not signed it.  However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or distribute the Library or its derivative works.  These actions are prohibited by law if you do not accept this License.  Therefore, by modifying or distributing the Library (or any work based on the Library), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying the Library or works based on it. \

\b 10.
\b0  Each time you redistribute the Library (or any work based on the Library), the recipient automatically receives a license from the original licensor to copy, distribute, link with or modify the Library subject to these terms and conditions.  You may not impose any further restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein. You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties to this License. \

\b 11.
\b0  If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues), conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not excuse you from the conditions of this License.  If you cannot distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may not distribute the Library at all.  For example, if a patent license would not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Library by all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to refrain entirely from distribution of the Library. \
If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to apply, and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other circumstances. \
It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the integrity of the free software distribution system which is implemented by public license practices.  Many people have made generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed through that system in reliance on consistent application of that system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot impose that choice. \
This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to be a consequence of the rest of this License. \

\b 12.
\b0  If the distribution and/or use of the Library is restricted in certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the original copyright holder who places the Library under this License may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among countries not thus excluded.  In such case, this License incorporates the limitation as if written in the body of this License. \

\b 13.
\b0  The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of the Library General Public License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns. \
Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the Library specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and any later version, you have the option of following the terms and conditions either of that version or of any later version published by the Free Software Foundation.  If the Library does not specify a license version number, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software Foundation. \

\b 14.
\b0  If you wish to incorporate parts of the Library into other free programs whose distribution conditions are incompatible with these, write to the author to ask for permission.  For software which is copyrighted by the Free Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes make exceptions for this.  Our decision will be guided by the two goals of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally. \
NO WARRANTY \

\b 15. 
\b0 BECAUSE THE LIBRARY IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE LIBRARY, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW. EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE LIBRARY AS IS WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE LIBRARY IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE LIBRARY PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION. \

\b 16. 
\b0 IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE LIBRARY AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE LIBRARY (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE LIBRARY TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER SOFTWARE), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. \

\b END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
\b0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs24 \cf0  \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 John W. Eaton ( man )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1990, 1991 John W. Eaton.\
Man is free software and is licensed under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL) as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the man software under the terms of GPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple. The man software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GPL for more details; a copy of the GPL is included with this product.  
\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU GPL Version 2, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs24 \cf0 \
Phillip J. Eby ( setuptools )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 Phillip J. Eby <distutils-sig at python org>\
Setuptools is distributed under the Python Software Foundation License <http://www.python.org/download/releases/2.4.2/license/> or the Zope Public License <http://www.zope.org/Resources/ZPL>.  
\fs20 [Apple Note:  A copy of the PSF License is found elsewhere in this document; for the Zope Public License please refer to the Zope attribution, where a copy of the ZPL is included.]\

\b\fs24 \
The Electronic Dictionary Research and Development Group ( JMDict )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006 Electronic Dictionary Research and Development Group.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sa280
\cf0 The JMdict dictionary files are made available under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/. 
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Ralf S. Engelschall ( Apache SSL module )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1998-2000 Ralf S. Engelschall. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgment:  This product includes software developed by Ralf S. Engelschall <rse@engelschall.com> for use in the mod_ssl project (http://www.modssl.org/).  4. The names mod_ssl must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. For written permission, please contact rse@engelschall.com.  5. Products derived from this software may not be called mod_ssl nor may mod_ssl appear in their names without prior written permission of Ralf S. Engelschall.  6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following acknowledgment:  This product includes software developed by Ralf S. Engelschall <rse@engelschall.com> for use in the mod_ssl project (http://www.modssl.org/).\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY RALF S. ENGELSCHALL ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL RALF S. ENGELSCHALL OR HIS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b \cf0 Enthought, Inc. and SciPy Developers ( SciPy )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001, 2002 Enthought, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Copyright \'a9 2003-2012 SciPy Developers. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
a. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
b. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
c. Neither the name of Enthought nor the names of the SciPy Developers may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Hiroaki Etoh, Federico G. Schwindt, and Miodrag Vallat ( stack_protector.c )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2002 Hiroaki Etoh, Federico G. Schwindt, and Miodrag Vallat.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Michael Everson ( Unicode Mapping Tables )
\b0 \
Used with permission from the author.\
\

\b Paul Falstad ( zsh )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1992-1996 Paul Falstad. All rights reserved.\
Permission is hereby granted, without written agreement and without license or royalty fees, to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and to distribute modified versions of this software for any purpose, provided that the above copyright notice and the following two paragraphs appear in all copies of this software.\
In no event shall Paul Falstad or the Zsh Development Group be liable to any party for direct, indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages arising out of the use of this software and its documentation, even if Paul Falstad and the Zsh Development Group have been advised of the possibility of such damage.  Paul Falstad and the Zsh Development Group specifically disclaim any warranties, including, but not limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose.  The software provided hereunder is on an as is basis, and Paul Falstad and the Zsh Development Group have no obligation to provide maintenance, support, updates, enhancements, or modifications.\
\

\b Foreningen for frit tilg\'e6ngelige sprogv\'e6rkt\'f8jer ( Stavekontrolden )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2007, Foreningen for frit tilg\'e6ngelige sprogv\'e6rkt\'f8jer.
\b \

\b0 These files are published under the following open source licenses:\
GNU GPL version 2.0\
GNU LGPL version 2.1\
Mozilla MPL version 1.1\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Chad Fowler, et al. ( ruby_dnssd, RubyGems )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2004 Chad Fowler, Rich Kilmer, Charles Mills ( ruby_dnssd )\
Copyright \'a9 2004-2006 Rich Kilmer, Chad Fowler, David Black, Paul Brannan, Jim Weirch ( RubyGems )\
You can obtain the ruby_dnssd source here:  http://dnssd.rubyforge.org, and the RubyGems sources here:  http://rubyforge.org/projects/rubygems/.\
DNSSD and RubyGems are released under the Ruby license.  
\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the Ruby License, please refer to the Yukihiro Matsumoto (Ruby) attribution, where a copy of the Ruby LIcense is included]
\fs24 \
\

\b Ruoyu Fu ( SwiftyJSON )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The MIT License (MIT)\
Copyright \'a9 2014 Ruoyu Fu \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 FreeBSD, Inc. ( BSD Operating System, JavaJDK15 patch )
\b0 \
This product contains software provided by FreeBSD, Inc. and its contributors.\
Copyright \'a9 1994-2010 FreeBSD, Inc. All rights reserved. \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: \
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE FREEBSD PROJECT AS IS AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FREEBSD PROJECT OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. \
The views and conclusions contained in the software and documentation are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing official policies, either expressed or implied, of the FreeBSD Project or FreeBSD, Inc. \
\

\b Jason Evans ( FreeBSD Red-Black Tree Library )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2008 Jason Evans <jasone@FreeBSD.org>.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright\'a0notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer unmodified other than the allowable addition of one or more copyright notices.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. \'a0IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Flying Meat Inc. ( FMDB )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2008-2014 Flying Meat Inc.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Free Software Foundation ( various GNU projects, including bash, bc, diffutils, emacs, gettext, gnutar, grep, groff, gzip, libstdc++, patch, readline, screen, texinfo )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1988-2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc. (FSF).\
Parts of this product include certain software owned by the FSF and licensed by Apple. You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the FSF software under the terms of GNU General Public License (GPL), without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple.  The FSF software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GPL for more details; a copy of the GPL is included below.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
\b0 \
Version 2, June 1991 \
Copyright \'a9 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.  \
59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307, USA\
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.\

\b Preamble
\b0 \
The licenses for most software are designed to take away your freedom to share and change it. By contrast, the GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free software--to make sure the software is free for all its users. This General Public License applies to most of the Free Software Foundation's software and to any other program whose authors commit to using it. (Some other Free Software Foundation software is covered by the GNU Library General Public License instead.) You can apply it to your programs, too. \
When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not price. Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for this service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new free programs; and that you know you can do these things. \
To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights. These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it. \
For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that you have. You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code. And you must show them these terms so they know their rights. \
We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and (2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify the software. \
Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make certain that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free software. If the software is modified by someone else and passed on, we want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original, so that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original authors' reputations. \
Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software patents. We wish to avoid the danger that redistributors of a free program will individually obtain patent licenses, in effect making the program proprietary. To prevent this, we have made it clear that any patent must be licensed for everyone's free use or not licensed at all. \
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and modification follow. \

\b TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION
\b0 \

\b 0.
\b0  This License applies to any program or other work which contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be distributed under the terms of this General Public License. The Program, below, refers to any such program or work, and a work based on the Program means either the Program or any derivative work under copyright law: that is to say, a work containing the Program or a portion of it, either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated into another language. (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in the term modification.) Each licensee is addressed as you. \
Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not covered by this License; they are outside its scope. The act of running the Program is not restricted, and the output from the Program is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the Program (independent of having been made by running the Program). Whether that is true depends on what the Program does. \

\b 1.
\b0  You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty; and give any other recipients of the Program a copy of this License along with the Program. \
You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee. \

\b 2.
\b0  You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion of it, thus forming a work based on the Program, and copy and distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1 above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:  \
 
\b a)
\b0  You must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.\
 
\b b)
\b0  You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that in whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or any part thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to all third parties under the terms of this License. \
 
\b c)
\b0  If the modified program normally reads commands interactively when run, you must cause it, when started running for such interactive use in the most ordinary way, to print or display an announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a notice that there is no warranty (or else, saying that you provide a warranty) and that users may redistribute the program under these conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy of this License. (Exception: if the Program itself is interactive but does not normally print such an announcement, your work based on the Program is not required to print an announcement.) \
These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole. If identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Program,and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those sections when you distribute them as separate works. But when you distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based on the Program, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it. \
Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or collective works based on the Program. \
In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Program with the Program (or with a work based on the Program) on a volume of a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under the scope of this License. \

\b 3.
\b0  You may copy and distribute the Program (or a work based on it, under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following: \
 
\b a)
\b0  Accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or, \
 
\b b)
\b0  Accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three years, to give any third party, for a charge no more than your cost of physically performing source distribution, a complete machine-readable copy of the corresponding source code, to be distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or, \
 
\b c)
\b0  Accompany it with the information you received as to the offer to distribute corresponding source code. (This alternative is allowed only for noncommercial distribution and only if you received the program in object code or executable form with such an offer, in accord with Subsection b above.) \
The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for making modifications to it. For an executable work, complete source code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to control compilation and installation of the executable. However, as a special exception, the source code distributed need not include anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component itself accompanies the executable. \
If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent access to copy the source code from the same place counts as distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not compelled to copy the source along with the object code. \

\b 4.
\b0  You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program except as expressly provided under this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Program is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License. However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance. \

\b 5.
\b0  You are not required to accept this License, since you have not signed it. However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or distribute the Program or its derivative works. These actions are prohibited by law if you do not accept this License. Therefore, by modifying or distributing the Program (or any work based on the Program), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying the Program or works based on it. \

\b 6.
\b0  Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on the Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to these terms and conditions. You may not impose any further restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein. You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties to this License. \

\b 7.
\b0  If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues), conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not excuse you from the conditions of this License. If you cannot distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may not distribute the Program at all. For example, if a patent license would not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Program by all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to refrain entirely from distribution of the Program. \
If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other circumstances. \
It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the integrity of the free software distribution system, which is implemented by public license practices. Many people have made generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed through that system in reliance on consistent application of that system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot impose that choice. \
This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to be a consequence of the rest of this License. \

\b 8.
\b0  If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the original copyright holder who places the Program under this License may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among countries not thus excluded. In such case, this License incorporates the limitation as if written in the body of this License. \

\b 9.
\b0  The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of the General Public License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns. \
Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Program specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and any later version, you have the option of following the terms and conditions either of that version or of any later version published by the Free Software Foundation. If the Program does not specify a version number of this License, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software Foundation. \

\b 10.
\b0  If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to the author to ask for permission. For software which is copyrighted by the Free Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes make exceptions for this. Our decision will be guided by the two goals of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally. \

\b NO WARRANTY
\b0 \

\b 11.
\b0  BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW. EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM AS IS WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU. SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION. \

\b 12.
\b0  IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. \

\b END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
\b0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs24 \cf0 \
Free Software Foundation ( GNU libiconv )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc. (FSF).\
GNU libiconv is owned by the FSF and licensed under the terms of the GNU Library General Public License, Version 2 (LGPL). You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the libiconv software under the terms of LGPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple.  The libiconv software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the LGPL for more details; a copy of the LGPL is included with this product.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 GNU LIBRARY GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
\b0 \
Version 2, June 1991\
[Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU Library General Public License, please refer to the Easy Software Products (CUPS) attribution, where a copy of the LGPL is included]\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs24 \cf0 \
Free Software Foundation ( ncurses )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001 Free Software Foundation, Inc.  \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the Software), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:  The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE. \
Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization.\
\

\b The FreeType Project ( FreeType )
\b0 \
Portions of this software are copyrighted 2000-2006, 2007 The FreeType Project (www.freetype.org) (authors: David Turner, Robert Wilhelm, Werner Lemberg).  All rights reserved.\
The FreeType license may be found at http://freetype.sourceforge.net/FTL.TXT\
THE FREETYPE PROJECT IS PROVIDED 'AS IS' WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. IN NO EVENT WILL ANY OF THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES CAUSED BY THE USE OR THE INABILITY TO USE, OF THE FREETYPE PROJECT.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Eric Friedman, Itay Maman ( Boost C++ Libraries ) 
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2002, 2003 Eric Friedman, Itay Maman\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person or organization obtaining a copy of the software and accompanying documentation covered by this license (the "Software") to use, reproduce, display, distribute, execute, and transmit the Software, and to prepare derivative works of the Software, and to permit third-parties to whom the Software is furnished to do so, all subject to the following:  The copyright notices in the Software and this entire statement, including the above license grant, this restriction and the following disclaimer, must be included in all copies of the Software, in whole or in part, and all derivative works of the Software, unless such copies or derivative works are solely in the form of machine-executable object code generated by a source language processor.  THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR ANYONE DISTRIBUTING THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Noah S. Friedman, Martin Schwenke, et al. ( gnuserv, gnuclient )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1994-2001 Noah S. Friedman, Martin Schwenke; Copyright \'a9 1989-1994,1996, 1997 Free Software Foundation, Inc.; Copyright \'a9 1995 Sun Microsystems, Inc.\
The gnuserv and gnuclient software is free software and is licensed under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL) as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the gnuserv and gnuclient software under the terms of GPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple. The gnuserv and gnuclient software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GPL for more details; a copy of the GPL is included with this product.  
\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU GPL Version 2, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs24 \cf0 \
Hisakuni Fujimoto ( RubyCocoa )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006 Hisakuni Fujimoto.\
RubyCocoa is copyrighted free software by FUJIMOTO Hisakuni <hisa at fobj.com>.  You can redistribute it and/or modify it under either the terms of the LGPL (the GNU LESSER GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE Version 2.1, see the file LGPL), or the conditions below:\
1. You may make and give away verbatim copies of the source form of the software without restriction, provided that you duplicate all of the original copyright notices and associated disclaimers.  2. You may modify your copy of the software in any way, provided that you do at least ONE of the following:\
       a) place your modifications in the Public Domain or otherwise make them Freely Available, such as by posting said modifications to Usenet or an equivalent medium, or by allowing the author to include your modifications in the software.\
       b) use the modified software only within your corporation or organization.\
       c) give non-standard binaries non-standard names, with instructions on where to get the original software distribution.\
       d) make other distribution arrangements with the author.\
3. You may distribute the software in object code or binary form, provided that you do at least ONE of the following:\
       a) distribute the binaries and library files of the software, together with instructions (in the manual page or equivalent) on where to get the original distribution.\
       b) accompany the distribution with the machine-readable source of the software.\
       c) give non-standard binaries non-standard names, with instructions on where to get the original software distribution.\
       d) make other distribution arrangements with the author.\
4. You may modify and include the part of the software into any other software (possibly commercial).  But some files in the distribution are not written by the author, so that they are not under these terms.  For the list of those files and their copying conditions, see the file LEGAL.\
5. The scripts and library files supplied as input to or produced as output from the software do not automatically fall under the copyright of the software, but belong to whomever generated them, and may be sold commercially, and may be aggregated with this software.\
6. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\

\b \
Jean-loup Gailly ( gzip )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1992-1993 Jean-loup Gailly.\
The gzip software is free software and is licensed under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL) as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the gzip software under the terms of GPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple. The gzip software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GPL for more details; a copy of the GPL is included with this product.  
\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU GPL Version 2, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]\

\b\fs24 \
Jean-loup Gailly and Mark Adler ( zlib )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1995-2013 Jean-loup Gailly and Mark Adler.\
This software is provided 'as-is', without any express or implied warranty.  In no event will the authors be held liable for any damages arising from the use of this software. Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose, including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it freely, subject to the following restrictions: \
1. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not claim that you wrote the original software. If you use this software in a product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be appreciated but is not required. \
2. Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be misrepresented as being the original software. \
3. This notice may not be removed or altered from any source distribution.\

\b \
Matthew D. Gauthier ( srm )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2000 Matthew D. Gauthier.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the Software), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of the contributors shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Geonames Project ( Geonames geographical data )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2008 Geonames Project, Marc Wick, et al.\
Thanks to the GeoNames project <http://www.geonames.org/>\'a0for providing geographical data. \'a0Geonames is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.  The Data is provided "as is" without warranty or any representation of accuracy, timeliness or completeness.\
\

\b Aaron D. Gifford ( SHA2 )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2000-2001, Aaron D. Gifford. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTOR(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTOR(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION).\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Jean-Luc Giraud ( smart card reader drivers )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2003 Jean-Luc Giraud <jlgiraud@mac.com>  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement:  This product includes software developed by: Jean-Luc Giraud <jlgiraud@mac.com>  4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
Changes to this license can be made only by the copyright author with explicit written consent.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b \
Brian Gladman ( AES implementation, SHA2 Message Digest )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2003, Dr Brian Gladman, Worcester, UK.   All rights reserved.\
LICENSE TERMS\
The free distribution and use of this software in both source and binary form is allowed (with or without changes) provided that:  \
1. distributions of this source code include the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer;\
2. distributions in binary form include the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other associated materials;\
3. the copyright holder's name is not used to endorse products built using this software without specific written permission.\
ALTERNATIVELY, provided that this notice is retained in full, this product may be distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL), in which case the provisions of the GPL apply INSTEAD OF those given above.\
DISCLAIMER\
This software is provided 'as is' with no explicit or implied warranties in respect of its properties, including, but not limited to, correctness and/or fitness for purpose.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Brian Gladman ( AES-XTS )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1998-2007, Brian Gladman, Worcester, UK. All rights reserved.\
LICENSE TERMS\
The free distribution and use of this software is allowed (with or without changes) provided that:\
1. source code distributions include the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer;\
2. binary distributions include the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in their documentation;\
3. the name of the copyright holder is not used to endorse products built using this software without specific written permission.\
DISCLAIMER\
This software is provided 'as is' with no explicit or implied warranties in respect of its properties, including, but not limited to, correctness and/or fitness for purpose.\
Issue Date: 20/12/2007\

\b \
Global IP Sound ( iLBC sound codec )
\b0 \
All use of the Original Code (GIPS iLBC, and code provided by GIPS as part of any related IETF Standard or draft standard) is subject to the complete Global IP Sound iLBC Public License, IETF Standard, Limited Commercial Use (the (License\'94). By accessing the Original Code You agree to the License terms. PLEASE SEE THE COMPLETE LICENSE BELOW FOR ADDITIONAL TERMS. In general: \
- Personal, non-commercial use is generally permitted. \
- Commercialization is permitted with certain limitations; for example, to ensure that every iLBC decoder can decode every iLBC-encoded payload, commercial \'93Deployment\'94 must comply with the applicable IETF Standard/draft, and the format of the bitstream may not be modified. \
- You are provided no warranty or support, and all liability is disclaimed. \
- You must register this license with GIPS prior to any commercial Deployment. \
The License is available from http://www.globalipsound.com/legal/licenses/ilbc; or from Global IP Sound Europe AB, \'85landsgatan 42, SE-116 63, Stockholm, Sweden, +46.8.545.5.30.40 tel, +46.8.545.5.30.49 fax; or from Global IP Sound Inc.,900 Kearny Street, 5thFloor, San Francisco, California 94133-5124 USA, +1 415.397.2555 tel, +1 415.397.2577 fax; or by sending a request to info@globalipsound.com. \
The current IETF Standards can also be found at http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3951.txt plus http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3952.txt. The initial developer of the Original Code is Global IP Sound Inc. Portions Copyright \'a9 1999-2005, All Rights Reserved.  \
iLBC is a trademark of Global IP Sound. All redistribution is subject to the License; source code must include this Notice. \

\b \
Glyph & Cog, LLC ( Xpdf JBIG2 decoder )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Portions of this product Copyright \'a9 2002-2005 Glyph & Cog, LLC. The Xpdf JBIG2 decoder is used under license.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
Google Inc., ( Google-gflags, PCRECPP, Protocol Buffers, TCMalloc )
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 PCRECPP, TCMalloc:  Copyright \'a9 2005, Google Inc.  All rights reserved.\
Google-gflags:  Copyright \'a9 2006, Google Inc.  All rights reserved.\
Protocol Buffers:  Copyright \'a9 2014, Google Inc.  All rights reserved.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above  copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 Code generated by the Protocol Buffer compiler is owned by the owner of the input file used when generating it.  This code is not standalone and requires a support library to be linked with it.  This support library is itself covered by the above license.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
Google ( curve25519-donna )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2008, Google Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
curve25519-donna: Curve25519 elliptic curve, public key function.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://code.google.com/p/curve25519-donna/"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 \ul \ulc5 http://code.google.com/p/curve25519-donna/}}\
Adam Langley <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:agl@imperialviolet.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc5 agl@imperialviolet.org}}>\
Derived from public domain C code by Daniel J. Bernstein <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:djb@cr.yp.to"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc5 djb@cr.yp.to}}>. More information about curve25519 can be found here {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://cr.yp.to/ecdh.html"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc5 http://cr.yp.to/ecdh.html}}. djb's sample implementation of curve25519 is written in a special assembly language called qhasm and uses the floating point registers. This is, almost, a clean room reimplementation from the curve25519 paper. It uses many of the tricks described therein. Only the crecip function is taken from the sample implementation.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Google Inc. ( J2ObjC )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Copyright \'a9 Google Inc.\
This library is distributed under the Apache 2.0 license found in the LICENSE file with the following exceptions. The protocol buffers library is distributed under the same BSD license as Google's protocol buffers. [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
Google Inc. ( Mozc )\

\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Copyright \'a9 2010-2014, Google Inc All rights reserved. \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: \
	1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
	2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. \
	3. Neither the name of the <ORGANIZATION> nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
Google Inc. ( Noto Fonts)\

\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Copyright \'a9 2007-16 Google Inc. All Rights Reserved.\
This Font Software is licensed under the SIL Open Font License, Version 1.1. [Apple Note: For a copy of the SIL Open Font License, Version 1.1, please refer to the STI Pub Companies attribution, where a copy of the SIL Open Font License is included.]\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Google Inc. ( Protocol Buffers/protobuf )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Copyright \'a9 2014, Google Inc.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: \
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. \
* Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Code generated by the Protocol Buffer compiler is owned by the owner of the input file used when generating it.  This code is not standalone and requires a support library to be linked with it.  This support library is itself covered by the above license.
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
Google Inc. ( Snappy )\

\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Copyright 2011, Google Inc. All rights reserved.\cf6 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: \
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. \
* Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
Google Inc., Hilko Bengen, Joachim Metz, Stefan Buehlmann et al. ( YARA )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Copyright \'a9 2007-2016. The YARA Authors. All Rights Reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
G-Truc Creation - ( OpenGL Mathematics )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Copyright \'a9 2005 - 2011 G-Truc Creation\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE. 
\fs22 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Gabriel Handford ( MessagePack )
\b0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 The MIT License (MIT)\
Copyright \'a9 2014 Gabriel Handford \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Marijn Haverbeke ( CodeMirror )\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2012 by Marijn Haverbeke <marijnh@gmail.com>\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE. Please note that some subdirectories of the CodeMirror distribution include their own LICENSE files, and are released under different licenses.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Heimdal Project\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The Heimdal project is covered by several licenses:  \ul \ulc7 http://www.h5l.org/manual/HEAD/info/heimdal.html#Copyrights-and-Licenses\ulnone \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Kungliga Tekniska H\'f6gskolan
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1997-2008 Kungliga Tekniska H\'f6gskolan (Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden). All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of the Institute nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE INSTITUTE AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE INSTITUTE OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF  SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE  POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b -------------------------------\
Massachusetts Institute of Technolo
\b0 gy\
The parts of the libtelnet that handle Kerberos.\
Copyright \'a9 1990 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology\
Export of this software from the United States of America may require a specific license from the United States Government. It is the responsibility of any person or organization contemplating export to obtain such a license before exporting.\
WITHIN THAT CONSTRAINT, permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of M.I.T. not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.  M.I.T. makes no representations about the suitability of this software for any purpose.  It is provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
\b \
-------------------------------\
The Regents of the University of California \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The parts of the libroken, most of libtelnet, libeditline, telnet, ftp, and popper.\
Copyright \'a9 1988, 1990, 1993 The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
-------------------------------\
Simmule Turner and Rich Salz \

\b0 libeditline\
Copyright \'a9 1992 Simmule Turner and Rich Salz.  All rights reserved. \
This software is not subject to any license of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company or of the Regents of the University of California. \
Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose on any computer system, and to alter it and redistribute it freely, subject to the following restrictions:\
1. The authors are not responsible for the consequences of use of this software, no matter how awful, even if they arise from flaws in it.\
2. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented, either by explicit claim or by omission.  Since few users ever read sources, credits must appear in the documentation.\
3. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be misrepresented as being the original software.  Since few users ever read sources, credits must appear in the documentation.\
4. This notice may not be removed or altered.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 -------------------------------
\b0 \

\b Michael J. Fromberger
\b0 \
The RSA/DH support for libhcrypto.\
IMath is Copyright \'a9 2002-2005 Michael J. Fromberger\
You may use it subject to the following Licensing Terms:\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\

\b -------------------------------
\b0 \

\b Doug Rabson
\b0 \
GSS-API mechglue layer.\
Copyright \'a9 2005 Doug Rabson. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b -------------------------------\
PADL Software Pty Ltd\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 CFX implementation for GSS-API krb5 mech.\
Copyright \'a9 2003, PADL Software Pty Ltd. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of PADL Software nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY PADL SOFTWARE AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL PADL SOFTWARE OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 -------------------------------
\b0 \

\b Marko Kreen
\b0 \
Fortuna in libhcrypto\
Copyright \'a9 2005 Marko Kreen. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions\
are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b -------------------------------\
NTT (Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation)
\b0 \
Camellia in libhcrypto\
Copyright \'a9 2006,2007 NTT (Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation) . All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as the first lines of this file unmodified.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY NTT ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL NTT BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b -------------------------------\
The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 vis.c in libroken\
Copyright \'a9 1999, 2005 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 -------------------------------\
Vincent Rijmen, Antoon Bosselaers, Paulo Barreto\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 AES in libhcrypto\
rijndael-alg-fst.c @version 3.0 (December 2000)\
Optimised ANSI C code for the Rijndael cipher (now AES)\
@author Vincent Rijmen <vincent.rijmen@esat.kuleuven.ac.be>\
@author Antoon Bosselaers <antoon.bosselaers@esat.kuleuven.ac.be>\
@author Paulo Barreto <paulo.barreto@terra.com.br>\
This code is hereby placed in the public domain.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS ''AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 -------------------------------
\b0 \

\b Richard Outerbridge
\b0 \
DES core in libhcrypto  D3DES (V5.09) - A portable, public domain, version of the Data Encryption Standard.\
Written with Symantec's THINK (Lightspeed) C by Richard Outerbridge. Thanks to: Dan Hoey for his excellent Initial and Inverse permutation code;  Jim Gillogly & Phil Karn for the DES key schedule code; Dennis Ferguson, Eric Young and Dana How for comparing notes; and Ray Lau,for humouring me on. \
Copyright \'a9  1988,1989,1990,1991,1992 by Richard Outerbridge.\
(GEnie : OUTER; CIS : [71755,204]) Graven Imagery, 1992.\

\b \
David Heinemeier Hansson ( Ruby on Rails )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2004 David Heinemeier Hansson\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:  The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\

\b \
Kevin Hendricks, N\'e9meth L\'e1szl\'f3 et al. ( Hunspell )
\b0 \
GPL 2.0/LGPL 2.1/MPL 1.1 tri-license\
The contents of this software may be used under the terms of the GNU General Public License Version 2 or later (the "GPL"), or the GNU Lesser General Public License Version 2.1 or later (the "LGPL", see COPYING.LGPL) or (excepting the LGPLed GNU gettext library in the intl/ directory) the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 or later (the "MPL", see COPYING.MPL).\
Software distributed under these licenses is distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the licences for the specific language governing rights and limitations under the licenses.\
\

\b Lloyd Hilaiel ( yajl - yet another JSON library )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2007-2009, Lloyd Hilaiel.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the\'a0distribution.\
3. Neither the name of Lloyd Hilaiel nor the names of its\'a0contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived\'a0from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 David Hinds ( PC Card driver )
\b0 \
This product contains software provided by David Hinds under the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1. The initial developer of the original code is David Hinds <dhinds@hyper.stanford.edu>. Portions created by David A. Hinds are Copyright \'a9 1998 David A. Hinds. All rights reserved.  Source code of Apple's modifications to this software is available under the MPL 1.1 and may be found at http://www.opensource.apple.com/.\
\

\b Richard Hipp ( SQLite )
\b0 \
(from http://www.sqlite.org/copyright.html)\

\b SQLite Copyright 
\b0 \
All of the deliverable code in SQLite has been dedicated to the public domain by the authors. All code authors, and representatives of the companies they work for, have signed affidavits dedicating their contributions to the public domain and originals of those signed affidavits are stored in a firesafe at the main offices of Hwaci. Anyone is free to copy, modify, publish, use, compile, sell, or distribute the original SQLite code, either in source code form or as a compiled binary, for any purpose, commercial or non-commercial, and by any means.\
The previous paragraph applies to the deliverable code in SQLite - those parts of the SQLite library that you actually bundle and ship with a larger application. Portions of the documentation and some code used as part of the build process might fall under other licenses. The details here are unclear. We do not worry about the licensing of the documentation and build code so much because none of these things are part of the core deliverable SQLite library.\
All of the deliverable code in SQLite has been written from scratch. No code has been taken from other projects or from the open internet. Every line of code can be traced back to its original author, and all of those authors have public domain dedications on file. So the SQLite code base is clean and is uncontaminated with f you feel like you really have to purchase a license for SQLite, Hwaci, the company that employs the architect and principal developers of SQLite, will sell you one. \

\b Obtaining An Explicit License To Use SQLite\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Even though SQLite is in the public domain and does not require a license, some users want to obtain a license anyway. Some reasons for obtaining a license include:\
\'95  You are using SQLite in a jurisdiction that does not recognize the public domain.\
\'95  You are using SQLite in a jurisdiction that does not recognize the right of an author to dedicate their work to the public domain.\
\'95  You want to hold a tangible legal document as evidence that you have the legal right to use and distribute SQLite.\
\'95  Your legal department tells you that you have to purchase a license.\
If you feel like you really have to purchase a license for SQLite, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.hwaci.com/"}}{\fldrslt Hwaci}}, the company that employs the architect and principal developers of SQLite, will {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.hwaci.com/cgi-bin/license-step1"}}{\fldrslt sell you one}}.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Contributed Code\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 In order to keep SQLite completely free and unencumbered by copyright, all new contributors to the SQLite code base are asked to dedicate their contributions to the public domain. If you want to send a patch or enhancement for possible inclusion in the SQLite source tree, please accompany the patch with the following statement:\
The author or authors of this code dedicate any and all copyright interest in this code to the public domain. We make this dedication for the benefit of the public at large and to the detriment of our heirs and successors. We intend this dedication to be an overt act of relinquishment in perpetuity of all present and future rights to this code under copyright law.\
We are not able to accept patches or changes to SQLite that are not accompanied by a statement such as the above. In addition, if you make changes or enhancements as an employee, then a simple statement such as the above is insufficient. You must also send by surface mail a copyright release signed by a company officer. A signed original of the copyright release should be mailed to: Hwaci, 6200 Maple Cove Lane, Charlotte, NC 28269,USA.  A template copyright release is available in PDF or HTML. You can use this release to make future changes.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 James Howard, Gabor Kovesdan and Dag-Erling Coidan Smorgrav ( BSD Grep )
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 Copyright \'a9 1999 James Howard and Dag-Erling Co\'efdan Sm\'f8rgrav\
Copyright \'a9 2008-2009 Gabor Kovesdan <{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:gabor@FreeBSD.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc8 gabor@FreeBSD.org}}> All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. \'a0IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS\
OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY\
OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b \cf0 John D. Hunter ( matplotlib )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2002-2009 John D. Hunter; All Rights Reserved\
http://matplotlib.sourceforge.net/users/license.html\
License\
Matplotlib only uses BSD compatible code, and its license is based on the PSF license. See the Open Source Initiative licenses page for details on individual licenses. Non-BSD compatible licenses (eg LGPL) are acceptable in matplotlib Toolkits. For a discussion of the motivations behind the licencing choice, see Licenses.\
License agreement for matplotlib 1.1.1\
1. This LICENSE AGREEMENT is between John D. Hunter ("JDH"), and the Individual or Organization ("Licensee") accessing and otherwise using matplotlib software in source or binary form and its associated documentation.\
2. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License Agreement, JDH hereby grants Licensee a nonexclusive, royalty-free, world-wide license to reproduce, analyze, test, perform and/or display publicly, prepare derivative works, distribute, and otherwise use matplotlib 1.1.1 alone or in any derivative version, provided, however, that JDH's License Agreement and JDH's notice of copyright, i.e., "Copyright \'a9 2002-2009 John D. Hunter; All Rights Reserved" are retained in matplotlib 1.1.1 alone or in any derivative version prepared by Licensee.\
3. In the event Licensee prepares a derivative work that is based on or incorporates matplotlib 1.1.1 or any part thereof, and wants to make the derivative work available to others as provided herein, then Licensee hereby agrees to include in any such work a brief summary of the changes made to matplotlib 1.1.1.\
4. JDH is making matplotlib 1.1.1 available to Licensee on an "AS IS" basis. JDH MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. BY WAY OF EXAMPLE, BUT NOT LIMITATION, JDH MAKES NO AND DISCLAIMS ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR THAT THE USE OF MATPLOTLIB 1.1.1 WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY THIRD PARTY RIGHTS.\
5. JDH SHALL NOT BE LIABLE TO LICENSEE OR ANY OTHER USERS OF MATPLOTLIB 1.1.1 FOR ANY INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR LOSS AS A RESULT OF MODIFYING, DISTRIBUTING, OR OTHERWISE USING MATPLOTLIB 1.1.1, OR ANY DERIVATIVE THEREOF, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY THEREOF.\
6. This License Agreement will automatically terminate upon a material breach of its terms and conditions.\
7. Nothing in this License Agreement shall be deemed to create any relationship of agency, partnership, or joint venture between JDH and Licensee. This License Agreement does not grant permission to use JDH trademarks or trade name in a trademark sense to endorse or promote products or services of Licensee, or any third party.\
8. By copying, installing or otherwise using matplotlib 1.1.1, Licensee agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of this License Agreement.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 IBM Corporation ( BSD kernel )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright c 1987 IBM Corporation. All rights reserved.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of IBM not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.\
IBM DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL IBM BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx0\tx0\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 IBM Corporation ( ICU - International Components for Unicode )\
ICU License - ICU 1.8.1 and later\

\b0 COPYRIGHT AND PERMISSION NOTICE\
Copyright \'a9 1995-2015 International Business Machines Corporation and others. All rights reserved.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, provided that the above copyright notice(s) and this permission notice appear in all copies of the Software and that both the above copyright notice(s) and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR HOLDERS INCLUDED IN THIS NOTICE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, OR ANY SPECIAL INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of a copyright holder shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization of the copyright holder.\
All trademarks and registered trademarks mentioned herein are the property of their respective owners.\

\b Third-Party Software Licenses
\b0 \
This section contains third-party software notices and/or additional terms for licensed third-party software components included within ICU libraries.\

\b 1. Unicode Data Files and Software
\b0 \
COPYRIGHT AND PERMISSION NOTICE\
Copyright \'a9 1991-2015 Unicode, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Distributed under the Terms of Use in http://www.unicode.org/copyright.html.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of the Unicode data files and any associated documentation (the "Data Files") or Unicode software and any associated documentation (the "Software") to deal in the Data Files or Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies of the Data Files or Software, and to permit persons to whom the Data Files or Software are furnished to do so, provided that\
(a) this copyright and permission notice appear with all copies of the Data Files or Software,\
(b) this copyright and permission notice appear in associated documentation, and\
(c) there is clear notice in each modified Data File or in the Software as well as in the documentation associated with the Data File(s) or Software that the data or software has been modified.\
THE DATA FILES AND SOFTWARE ARE PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR HOLDERS INCLUDED IN THIS NOTICE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, OR ANY SPECIAL INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THE DATA FILES OR SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of a copyright holder shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in these Data Files or Software without prior written authorization of the copyright holder.\

\b 2. Chinese/Japanese Word Break Dictionary Data (cjdict.txt)
\b0 \
The Google Chrome software developed by Google is licensed under the BSD license. Other software included in this distribution is provided under other licenses, as set forth below.\
The BSD License\
http://opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license.php \
Copyright \'a9 2006-2008, Google Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of  Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
The word list in cjdict.txt are generated by combining three word lists listed below with further processing for compound word breaking. The frequency is generated with an iterative training against Google web corpora. \
* Libtabe (Chinese)\
- https://sourceforge.net/project/?group_id=1519\
- Its license terms and conditions are shown below.\
* IPADIC (Japanese)\
- http://chasen.aist-nara.ac.jp/chasen/distribution.html\
- Its license terms and conditions are shown below.\
---------COPYING.libtabe ---- BEGIN--------------------\
Copyright \'a9 1999 TaBE Project.\
Copyright \'a9 1999 Pai-Hsiang Hsiao. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
. Neither the name of the TaBE Project nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, DIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Copyright \'a9 1999 Computer Systems and Communication Lab, Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
. Neither the name of the Computer Systems and Communication Lab nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Copyright 1996 Chih-Hao Tsai @ Beckman Institute, University of Illinois\
c-tsai4@uiuc.edu  http://casper.beckman.uiuc.edu/~c-tsai4\
---------------COPYING.libtabe-----END------------------------------------\
---------------COPYING.ipadic-----BEGIN------------------------------------\
Copyright 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 Nara Institute of Science and Technology.  All Rights Reserved.\
Use, reproduction, and distribution of this software is permitted. Any copy of this software, whether in its original form or modified, must include both the above copyright notice and the following paragraphs.\
Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NAIST), the copyright holders, disclaims all warranties with regard to this software, including all implied warranties of merchantability and fitness, in no event shall NAIST be liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or profits, whether in an action of contract, negligence or other tortuous action, arising out of or in connection with the use or performance of this software.\
A large portion of the dictionary entries originate from ICOT Free Software.  The following conditions for ICOT Free Software applies to the current dictionary as well.\
Each User may also freely distribute the Program, whether in its original form or modified, to any third party or parties, PROVIDED that the provisions of Section 3 ("NO WARRANTY") will ALWAYS appear on, or be attached to, the Program, which is distributed substantially in the same form as set out herein and that such intended distribution, if actually made, will neither violate or otherwise contravene any of the laws and regulations of the countries having jurisdiction over the User or the intended distribution itself.\
NO WARRANTY\
The program was produced on an experimental basis in the course of the research and development conducted during the project and is provided to users as so produced on an experimental basis.  Accordingly, the program is provided without any warranty whatsoever, whether express, implied, statutory or otherwise.  The term "warranty" used herein includes, but is not limited to, any warranty of the quality, performance, merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose of the program and the nonexistence of any infringement or violation of any right of any third party.\
Each user of the program will agree and understand, and be deemed to have agreed and understood, that there is no warranty whatsoever for the program and, accordingly, the entire risk arising from or otherwise connected with the program is assumed by the user.\
Therefore, neither ICOT, the copyright holder, or any other organization that participated in or was otherwise related to the development of the program and their respective officials, directors, officers and other employees shall be held liable for any and all damages, including, without limitation, general, special, incidental and consequential damages, arising out of or otherwise in connection with the use or inability to use the program or any product, material or result produced or otherwise obtained by using the program, regardless of whether they have been advised of, or otherwise had knowledge of, the possibility of such damages at any time during the project or thereafter.  Each user will be deemed to have agreed to the foregoing by his or her commencement of use of the program.  The term "use" as used herein includes, but is not limited to, the use, modification, copying and distribution of the program and the production of secondary products from the program.\
In the case where the program, whether in its original form or modified, was distributed or delivered to or received by a user from any person, organization or entity other than ICOT, unless it makes or grants independently of ICOT any specific warranty to the user in writing, such person, organization or entity, will also be exempted from and not be held liable to the user for any such damages as noted above as far as the program is concerned.\
---------------COPYING.ipadic-----END------------------------------------\

\b 3. Lao Word Break Dictionary Data (laodict.txt)
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2013 International Business Machines Corporation and others. All Rights Reserved.\
Project:    http://code.google.com/p/lao-dictionary/\
Dictionary: http://lao-dictionary.googlecode.com/git/Lao-Dictionary.txt\
License:    http://lao-dictionary.googlecode.com/git/Lao-Dictionary-LICENSE.txt (copied below)\
This file is derived from the above dictionary, with slight modifications.\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
Copyright \'a9 2013 Brian Eugene Wilson, Robert Martin Campbell. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------\

\b 4. Burmese Word Break Dictionary Data (burmesedict.txt)
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2014 International Business Machines Corporation and others. All Rights Reserved.\
This list is part of a project hosted at:  github.com/kanyawtech/myanmar-karen-word-lists\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
Copyright \'a9 2013, LeRoy Benjamin Sharon. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name Myanmar Karen Word Lists, nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------\

\b 5. Time Zone Database
\b0 \
ICU uses the public domain data and code derived from Time Zone Database for its time zone support. The ownership of the TZ database is explained in BCP 175: Procedure for Maintaining the Time Zone Database section 7.\

\b 7.  Database Ownership
\b0 \
The TZ database itself is not an IETF Contribution or an IETF document.  Rather it is a pre-existing and regularly updated work that is in the public domain, and is intended to remain in the public domain.  Therefore, BCPs 78 [RFC5378] and 79 [RFC3979] do not apply to the TZ Database or contributions that individuals make to it. Should any claims be made and substantiated against the TZ Database, the organization that is providing the IANA Considerations defined in this RFC, under the memorandum of understanding with the IETF, currently ICANN, may act in accordance with all competent court orders.  No ownership claims will be made by ICANN or the IETF Trust on the database or the code.  Any person making a contribution to the database or code waives all rights to future claims in that contribution or in the TZ Database.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 IBM Corporation ( Postfix )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1997, 1998, 1999, International Business Machines Corporation and others.  All Rights Reserved.\
The Postfix software (IBM software) is released under the IBM Public License Version 1.0.  A copy of the source code for this IBM software may be found in Apple's Open Source repository.  See Apple's Open Source web site (http://www.opensource.apple.com/) for information on how to obtain the source code.  THE IBM SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ON AN AS IS BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF TITLE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  NEITHER APPLE, IBM NOR ANY OTHER CONTRIBUTOR TO THE IBM SOFTWARE SHALL HAVE ANY LIABILITY FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTIAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, LOST PROFITS), HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OR DISTRIBUTION OF THE IBM SOFTWARE OR THE EXERCISE OF ANY RIGHTS GRANTED HEREUNDER, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.\
\

\b Industrial Light & Magic ( OpenEXR )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2002, Industrial Light & Magic, a division of Lucas Digital Ltd. LLC All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
\'95 Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
\'95 Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
\'95 Neither the name of Industrial Light & Magic nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. \
\

\b Info-ZIP ( zip, unzip )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1990-2004 Info-ZIP.  All rights reserved.\
For the purposes of this copyright and license, "Info-ZIP" is defined as the following set of individuals: Mark Adler, John Bush, Karl Davis, Harald Denker, Jean-Michel Dubois, Jean-loup Gailly, Hunter Goatley, Ian Gorman, Chris Herborth, Dirk Haase, Greg Hartwig, Robert Heath, Jonathan Hudson, Paul Kienitz, David Kirschbaum, Johnny Lee, Onno van der Linden, Igor Mandrichenko, Steve P. Miller, Sergio Monesi, Keith Owens, George Petrov, Greg Roelofs, Kai Uwe Rommel, Steve Salisbury, Dave Smith, Christian Spieler, Antoine Verheijen, Paul von Behren, Rich Wales, Mike White.\
This software is provided "as is," without warranty of any kind, express or implied.  In no event shall Info-ZIP or its contributors be held liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, special or consequential damages arising out of the use of or inability to use this software.\
Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose, including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it freely, subject to the following restrictions:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, definition, disclaimer, and this list of conditions.\
2. Redistributions in binary form (compiled executables) must reproduce the above copyright notice, definition, disclaimer, and this list of conditions in documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  The sole exception to this condition is redistribution of a standard UnZipSFX binary (including SFXWiz) as part of a self-extracting archive; that is permitted without inclusion of this license, as long as the normal SFX banner has not been removed from the binary or disabled.\
3. Altered versions--including, but not limited to, ports to new operating systems, existing ports with new graphical interfaces, and dynamic, shared, or static library versions--must be plainly marked as such and must not be misrepresented as being the original source.  Such altered versions also must not be misrepresented as being Info-ZIP releases--including, but not limited to, labeling of the altered versions with the names "Info-ZIP" (or any variation thereof, including, but not limited to, different capitalizations), "Pocket UnZip," "WiZ" or "MacZip" without the explicit permission of Info-ZIP.  Such altered versions are further prohibited from misrepresentative use of the Zip-Bugs or Info-ZIP e-mail addresses or of the Info-ZIP URL(s).\
4. Info-ZIP retains the right to use the names "Info-ZIP," "Zip," "UnZip," "UnZipSFX," "WiZ," "Pocket UnZip," "Pocket Zip," and "MacZip" for its own source and binary releases.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Intel Corporation ( BSD kernel )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1988, 1989 by Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, California. All rights reserved.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appears in all copies and that both the copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of Intel not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.\
INTEL DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL INTEL BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE, OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\

\b \
Intel Corporation ( Intel Threading Building Blocks )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2005-2017 Intel Corporation\
Apache License Version 2.0, January 2004 http://www.apache.org/licenses/ [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]
\b \
\
Intel Corporation et al. ( OpenCV library )
\b0 \
Intel License Agreement For Open Source Computer Vision Library\
Copyright \'a9 2000, Intel Corporation, all rights reserved. Third party copyrights are property of their respective owners.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistribution's of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistribution's in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* The name of Intel Corporation may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
This software is provided by the copyright holders and contributors "as is" and any express or implied warranties, including, but not limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose are disclaimed. In no event shall the Intel Corporation or contributors be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, exemplary, or consequential damages (including, but not limited to, procurement of substitute goods or services; loss of use, data, or profits; or business interruption) however caused and on any theory of liability, whether in contract, strict liability, or tort (including negligence or otherwise) arising in any way out of the use of this software, even if advised of the possibility of such damage.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
Intel Corporation ( Tiano EFI Dev Kit )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2004, Intel Corporation. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of the Intel Corporation nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b \
The Internet Society ( WebDAV )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1999 The Internet Society. All rights reserved.\
This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than English.\
The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.\
This document and the information contained herein is provided on an AS IS basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
Internet Software Consortium ( BIND )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2004, 2005 internet Software Consortium, Inc. ("ISC")\
Copyright \'a9 1996-2003 by Internet Software Consortium.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS AND ISC DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL ISC BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Bob Ippolito ( bdist_mpkg, macholib, modulegraph, py2app )
\b0 \
This is the MIT license.  This software may also be distributed under the same terms as Python (the PSF license).\
Copyright \'a9 2004 Bob Ippolito.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Iranian Mac User Group ( Persian-QWERTY )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2004-2006 Iranian Mac User Group.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:  The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Wenzel Jakob ( pybind11 )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2016 Wenzel Jakob <wenzel.jakob@epfl.ch>, All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
You are under no obligation whatsoever to provide any bug fixes, patches, or upgrades to the features, functionality or performance of the source code ("Enhancements") to anyone; however, if you choose to make your Enhancements available either publicly, or directly to the author of this software, without imposing a separate written license agreement for such Enhancements, then you hereby grant the following license: a non-exclusive, royalty-free perpetual license to install, use, modify, prepare derivative works, incorporate into other computer software, distribute, and sublicense such enhancements or derivative works thereof, in binary and source code form.\
\

\b JanRain ( Ruby-OpenID )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006 JanRain, Inc.\
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.\
\

\b Anders S. Johansen ( Levenshtein Distance C++ code )
\b0  \
Copyright \'a9 2003 Anders S. Johansen/SecondGuess ApS.  All rights reserved. \
Used with permission from the author. \
\

\b Angus Johnson ( Clipper )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2010-2014 Angus Johnson\
Boost Software License - Version 1.0 - August 17th, 2003\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person or organization obtaining a copy of the software and accompanying documentation covered by this license (the "Software") to use, reproduce, display, distribute, execute, and transmit the Software, and to prepare derivative works of the Software, and to permit third-parties to whom the Software is furnished to do so, all subject to the following:\
The copyright notices in the Software and this entire statement, including the above license grant, this restriction and the following disclaimer, must be included in all copies of the Software, in whole or in part, and all derivative works of the Software, unless such copies or derivative works are solely in the form of machine-executable object code generated by a source language processor.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR ANYONE DISTRIBUTING THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Evan Jones ( RowResizableViews )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2004-2005, Evan Jones.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of RowResizableViews nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b \cf0 Joyent Inc., et al. ( Illumos, illumos-joyent )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2011, 2013 Joyent, Inc. All rights reserved. \
Copyright \'a9 2012 - 2014 Delphix. All rights reserved. \
The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the Common Development and Distribution License (the "License"). You may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License. When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE. If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]. [
\fs20 Apple note: For a copy of the CDDL, please refer to the Sun Microsystems attribution, where a copy of the CDDL is included]
\fs24 \
\

\b JQuery Foundation Inc. ( jQuery )
\b0 \
Copyright 2005, 2014 jQuery Foundation, Inc. and other contributors \
Query JavaScript Library v2.1.0 * http://jquery.com/ * * Includes Sizzle.js * http://sizzlejs.com/ * * Released under the MIT license * http://jquery.org/license \
\

\b JS Foundation et al. ( Esprima )\

\b0 Copyright JS Foundation and other contributors, https://js.foundation/\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
  * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
  * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL <COPYRIGHT HOLDER> BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Juniper Networks ( libxo )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2014, Juniper Networks  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Martin Kahr ( AppleRemote )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006 Martin Kahr\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the \'93Software\'94), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \'93AS IS\'94, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Charles Karney ( GeographicLib )
\b0 \
This license applies to GeographicLib, versions 1.12 and later.\
Copyright \'a9 2008-2012, Charles Karney\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the \'93Software\'94), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \'93AS IS\'94, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Yehuda Katz ( handlebars v1.3.0 )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2011 by Yehuda Katz \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE. \
\

\b Mark J. Kilgard, Dietmar Planitzer, Silicon Graphics, Inc.  ( GLUT )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, Mark J. Kilgard; Copyright \'a9 1998, 2002, Dietmar Planitzer.
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 This program is freely distributable without licensing fees and is provided without guarantee or warranty expressed or implied. This program is -not- in the public domain.
\b \

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1993, Silicon Graphics, Inc. ( glut_shapes.c; glut_teapot.c )
\b \

\b0 Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both the copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of Silicon Graphics, Inc. not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.\
THE MATERIAL EMBODIED ON THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED TO YOU AS-IS AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  IN NO EVENT SHALL SILICON GRAPHICS, INC.  BE LIABLE TO YOU OR ANYONE ELSE FOR ANY DIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, LOSS OF PROFIT, LOSS OF USE, SAVINGS OR REVENUE, OR THE CLAIMS OF THIRD PARTIES, WHETHER OR NOT SILICON GRAPHICS, INC.  HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH LOSS, HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE POSSESSION, USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
US Government Users Restricted Rights:  Use, duplication, or disclosure by the Government is subject to restrictions set forth in FAR 52.227.19\'a9(2) or subparagraph \'a9(1)(ii) of the Rights in Technical Data and Computer Software clause at DFARS 252.227-7013 and/or in similar or successor clauses in the FAR or the DOD or NASA FAR Supplement.  Unpublished-- rights reserved under the copyright laws of the United States.  Contractor/manufacturer is Silicon Graphics, Inc., 2011 N.  Shoreline Blvd., Mountain View, CA 94039-7311.  OpenGL(TM) is a trademark of Silicon Graphics, Inc.
\b \

\b0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Robert Krawitz, et al. ( gutenprint; formerly Gimp-Print )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001-2007 Robert Krawitz, Andy Thaller, Dave Hill, Mark Tomlinson, Michael Sweet, Peter Missel, Richard Wisenoecker, Roger Leigh, Thomas Tonino, et al.
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 This software is free software and is licensed under the terms of the GNU General Public License ("GPL") as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for this software under the terms of GPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple. The software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GPL for more details; a copy of the GPL is included with this product.  
\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU GPL Version 2, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs24 \cf0 \
Christian Kruse ( CFPropertyList )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2010 Christian Kruse, <cjk@wwwtech.de>
\b \

\b0 Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the \'93Software\'94), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \'93AS IS\'94, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
\b \
\
Gerard D.C. Kuiken and others ( hyph-utf8 )
\b0 \
US English (hyph-en-us.tex): Copyright \'a9 1990, 2004, 2005 Gerard D.C. Kuiken. Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification, are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright notice and this notice are preserved.\
British English (hyph-en-gb.tex): Unlimited copying and redistribution of this file is permitted so long as the file is not modified in any way.\
Catalan (cahyph.tex):  Licensed under the LPPL (LaTeX Project Public License), found at http://www.latex-project.org/lppl/. You may obtain a complete, unmodified copy of all LPPL-licensed files at http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/help/Catalogue/entries/hyph-utf8.html.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Croatian:  Copyright \'a9 1994, 1996, 2011 Igor Marinowski (marinowski at gmail.com). Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above. \
Danish (hyph-da.tex):  Copyright 1994 Frank Jensen (Frank.Jensen@hugin.com). Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Dutch (hyph-nl.tex):  Copyright \'a9 1996, Piet Tutelaers.  Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above. \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Finnish (hyph-fi.tex):  Patterns may be freely distributed.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 French (hyph-fr.tex):  This file is available for free and can used and redistributed as is for free. Modified versions should have another name.\
German (hyph-de-1996.tex):  Copyright \'a9 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011, 2012 Werner Lemberg <wl@gnu.org>. Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
Greek (elhyph-utf8): Copyright \'a9 2008-2011 Dimitrios Filippou. Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above. \
Hungarian (Huhyphn):  The Initial Developer of the Original Code is Bence Nagy (bence.nagy@gmail.com). Portions created by the Initial Developer are Copyright \'a9 2003 the Initial Developer. All Rights Reserved. MPL 1.1/GPL 2.0/LGPL 2.1 You may obtain a copy of the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 at http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/.\
Italian (hyph-it.tex):  Copyright 2008-2011 Claudio Beccari. LGPL.  
\fs20 [Apple note: For a copy of the GNU Library General Public License, please refer to the WebKit attribution, where a copy of the LGPL is included]\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\fs24 \cf0 Norwegian (hyph-no.tex):  Copyright \'a9 2004, 2005 Rune Kleveland, Ole Michael Selberg. Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification is permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright notice and this notice are preserved.\
Polish (plhyph.tex):  Knuth License notice. This soft\'adware is copy\'adright and you are ex\'adplic\'aditly granted a li\'adcense which gives you, the user of the soft\'adware, le\'adgal per\'admis\'adsion to copy, dis\'adtribute and/or mod\'adify the soft\'adware, so long as if you mod\'adify the soft\'adware then it carry a dif\'adfer\'adent name from the orig\'adi\'adnal soft\'adware. \
Portuguese (hyph-pt.tex):  Copyright \'a9 1996 by  Pedro J. de Rezende (rezende@dcc.unicamp.br) and J.Joao Dias Almeida (jj@di.uminho.pt).
\f1\fs26  
\f0\fs24 Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
Romanian (rohyphen.tex):  Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Russian (hyph-ru.tex):  Copyright 1999-2003 Alexander I. Lebedev <swan@scon155.phys.msu.su>. Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
Spanish (hyph-es.tex): Copyright \'a9 Javier Bezos 1993 1997. Copyright \'a9 Javier Bezos and CervanTeX 2001-2010. Some parts, Copyright \'a9 by Francesc Carmona.
\f1\fs26  
\f0\fs24 Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 Swedish (hyph-sv.tex): Copyright 1994 by Jan Michael Rynning. All rights reserved. Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
Turkish (hyph-tr.tex): Copyright \'a9 1987 Pierre A. MacKay.  Copyright \'a9 2008, 2011 TUG. Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
Ukrainian:  Copyright \'a9 1998-2001 Maksym Polyakov.  Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
Joe Lambert ( ScrollFix v0.1)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2011, Joe Lambert. \
Free to use under the MIT license.  http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php \
ScrollFix v0.1 * http://www.joelambert.co.uk 
\b \
\
Matteo Landi et al. ( netmap )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2012-2014 Matteo Landi, Luigi Rizzo, Giuseppe Lettieri. All rights reserved.\
Copyright \'a9 2013-2014 Universita` di Pisa. All rights reserved.\
Copyright \'a9 2014 Vincenzo Maffione. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS \'93AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
Thomas G. Lane ( JPEG library )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1991-1998 Thomas G. Lane.  All rights reserved except as specified below.\
The authors make NO WARRANTY or representation, either express or implied, with respect to this software, its quality, accuracy, merchantability, or fitness for a particular purpose.  This software is provided AS IS, and you, its user, assume the entire risk as to its quality and accuracy. Permission is hereby granted to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software (or portions thereof) for any purpose, without fee, subject to these conditions: (1) If any part of the source code for this software is distributed, then this README file must be included, with this copyright and no-warranty notice unaltered; and any additions, deletions, or changes to the original files must be clearly indicated in accompanying documentation. (2) If only executable code is distributed, then the accompanying documentation must state that this software is based in part on the work of the Independent JPEG Group. (3) Permission for use of this software is granted only if the user accepts full responsibility for any undesirable consequences; the authors accept NO LIABILITY for damages of any kind. These conditions apply to any software derived from or based on the IJG code, not just to the unmodified library.  If you use our work, you ought to acknowledge us. Permission is NOT granted for the use of any IJG author's name or company name in advertising or publicity relating to this software or products derived from it.  This software may be referred to only as the Independent JPEG Group's software. We specifically permit and encourage the use of this software as the basis of commercial products, provided that all warranty or liability claims are assumed by the product vendor.\

\b \
Ville Laurikari ( TRE )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001-2009 Ville Laurikari <vl@iki.fi>  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER AND CONTRIBUTORS``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b \
Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics, Inc. ( TIFF library )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1988-1996 Sam Leffler. Copyright \'a9 1991-1996 Silicon Graphics, Inc.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS-IS AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE. \
\

\b Petri Lehtinen ( Jansson )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2009-2014 Petri Lehtinen <petri@digip.org>\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b \cf0 The LIBLINEAR Project ( LIBLINEAR )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2007-2015 The LIBLINEAR Project. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither name of copyright holders nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Lukens Liu ( Mobile Lucene )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 Lukens Liu\
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License\'94); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.  [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]\
\

\b Lukens Liu ( ObjCLucene )
\b0 \
The MIT License (MIT)\
Copyright \'a9 2015 Lukhnos Liu\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Niels Lohmann ( JSON for Modern C++ )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 MIT License \
Copyright \'a9 2013-2017 Niels Lohmann\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Edward Loper ( Epydoc )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright
\b  
\b0 \'a9 2002-2007 Edward Loper.  Epydoc is released under the following license:\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and any associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
The software is provided "as is", without warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to the warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose and noninfringement. In no event shall the authors or copyright holders be liable for any claim, damages or other liability, whether in an action of contract, tort or otherwise, arising from, out of or in connection with the software or the use or other dealings in the software.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Lua.org ( Lua, CGLua )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1994-2012 Lua.org, PUC-Rio (Lua).\
Copyright \'a9 2003-2005 The Kepler Project (CGLua).\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Lucent Technologies ( awk )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 Lucent Technologies 1997. All Rights Reserved.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that the copyright notice and this permission notice and warranty disclaimer appear in supporting documentation, and that the name Lucent Technologies or any of its entities not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.\
LUCENT DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL LUCENT OR ANY OF ITS ENTITIES BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Lucent Technologies ( dtoa.cpp )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1991, 2000, 2001 by Lucent Technologies.  The author of this software is David M. Gay.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose without fee is hereby granted, provided that this entire notice is included in all copies of any software which is or includes a copy or modification of this software and in all copies of the supporting documentation for such software.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED AS IS, WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTY.  IN PARTICULAR, NEITHER THE AUTHOR NOR LUCENT MAKES ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE MERCHANTABILITY OF THIS SOFTWARE OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\
\

\b K. K. Luke and May L.Y. Wong ( Hong Kong Cantonese Corpus )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 These are the transcriptions of the Hong Kong Cantonese Corpus (HKCanCor) created by Luke Kang Kwong <kkluke@ntu.edu.sg>. They are released under a CC BY license. If you use them, please cite: K. K. Luke and May L.Y. Wong (2015) The Hong Kong Cantonese Corpus: Design and Uses Journal of Chinese Linguistics (to appear). \
They are released under a CC BY license. <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode> \
You are free to: Share copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format Adapt remix, transform, and build upon the material for any purpose, even commercially. The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms. Under the following terms: Attribution You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use. No additional restrictions  You may not apply legal terms or Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Public License By exercising the Licensed Rights (defined below), You accept and agree to be bound by the terms and conditions of this Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Public License ("Public License"). To the extent this Public License may be interpreted as a contract, You are granted the Licensed Rights in consideration of Your acceptance of these terms and conditions, and the Licensor grants You such rights in consideration of benefits the Licensor receives from making the Licensed Material available under these terms and conditions. \
Section 1  Definitions. Adapted Material means material subject to Copyright and Similar Rights that is derived from or based upon the Licensed Material and in which the Licensed Material is translated, altered, arranged, transformed, or otherwise modified in a manner requiring permission under the Copyright and Similar Rights held by the Licensor. For purposes of this Public License, where the Licensed Material is a musical work, performance, or sound recording, Adapted Material is always produced where the Licensed Material is synched in timed relation with a moving image. Adapter's License means the license You apply to Your Copyright and Similar Rights in Your contributions to Adapted Material in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Public License. Copyright and Similar Rights means copyright and/or similar rights closely related to copyright including, without limitation, performance, broadcast, sound recording, and Sui Generis Database Rights, without regard to how the rights are labeled or categorized. For purposes of this Public License, the rights specified in Section 2(b)(1)-(2) are not Copyright and Similar Rights. Effective Technological Measures means those measures that, in the absence of proper authority, may not be circumvented under laws fulfilling obligations under Article 11 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty adopted on December 20, 1996, and/or similar international agreements. Exceptions and Limitations means fair use, fair dealing, and/or any other exception or limitation to Copyright and Similar Rights that applies to Your use of the Licensed Material. Licensed Material means the artistic or literary work, database, or other material to which the Licensor applied this Public License. Licensed Rights means the rights granted to You subject to the terms and conditions of this Public License, which are limited to all Copyright and Similar Rights that apply to Your use of the Licensed Material and that the Licensor has authority to license. Licensor means the individual(s) or entity(ies) granting rights under this Public License. Share means to provide material to the public by any means or process that requires permission under the Licensed Rights, such as reproduction, public display, public performance, distribution, dissemination, communication, or importation, and to make material available to the public including in ways that members of the public may access the material from a place and at a time individually chosen by them. Sui Generis Database Rights means rights other than copyright resulting from Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases, as amended and/or succeeded, as well as other essentially equivalent rights anywhere in the world. You means the individual or entity exercising the Licensed Rights under this Public License. Your has a corresponding meaning. \
Section 2  Scope. License grant. Subject to the terms and conditions of this Public License, the Licensor hereby grants You a worldwide, royalty-free, non-sublicensable, non-exclusive, irrevocable license to exercise the Licensed Rights in the Licensed Material to: reproduce and Share the Licensed Material, in whole or in part; and produce, reproduce, and Share Adapted Material. Exceptions and Limitations. For the avoidance of doubt, where Exceptions and Limitations apply to Your use, this Public License does not apply, and You do not need to comply with its terms and conditions. Term. The term of this Public License is specified in Section 6(a). Media and formats; technical modifications allowed. The Licensor authorizes You to exercise the Licensed Rights in all media and formats whether now known or hereafter created, and to make technical modifications necessary to do so. The Licensor waives and/or agrees not to assert any right or authority to forbid You from making technical modifications necessary to exercise the Licensed Rights, including technical modifications necessary to circumvent Effective Technological Measures. For purposes of this Public License, simply making modifications authorized by this Section 2(a)(4) never produces Adapted Material. Downstream recipients. Offer from the Licensor  Licensed Material. Every recipient of the Licensed Material automatically receives an offer from the Licensor to exercise the Licensed Rights under the terms and conditions of this Public License. No downstream restrictions. You may not offer or impose any additional or different terms or conditions on, or apply any Effective Technological Measures to, the Licensed Material if doing so restricts exercise of the Licensed Rights by any recipient of the Licensed Material. No endorsement. Nothing in this Public License constitutes or may be construed as permission to assert or imply that You are, or that Your use of the Licensed Material is, connected with, or sponsored, endorsed, or granted official status by, the Licensor or others designated to receive attribution as provided in Section 3(a)(1)(A)(i). Other rights. Moral rights, such as the right of integrity, are not licensed under this Public License, nor are publicity, privacy, and/or other similar personality rights; however, to the extent possible, the Licensor waives and/or agrees not to assert any such rights held by the Licensor to the limited extent necessary to allow You to exercise the Licensed Rights, but not otherwise. Patent and trademark rights are not licensed under this Public License. To the extent possible, the Licensor waives any right to collect royalties from You for the exercise of the Licensed Rights, whether directly or through a collecting society under any voluntary or waivable statutory or compulsory licensing scheme. In all other cases the Licensor expressly reserves any right to collect such royalties. \
Section 3  License Conditions. Your exercise of the Licensed Rights is expressly made subject to the following conditions. Attribution. If You Share the Licensed Material (including in modified form), You must: retain the following if it is supplied by the Licensor with the Licensed Material: identification of the creator(s) of the Licensed Material and any others designated to receive attribution, in any reasonable manner requested by the Licensor (including by pseudonym if designated); a copyright notice; a notice that refers to this Public License; a notice that refers to the disclaimer of warranties; a URI or hyperlink to the Licensed Material to the extent reasonably practicable; indicate if You modified the Licensed Material and retain an indication of any previous modifications; and indicate the Licensed Material is licensed under this Public License, and include the text of, or the URI or hyperlink to, this Public License. You may satisfy the conditions in Section 3(a)(1) in any reasonable manner based on the medium, means, and context in which You Share the Licensed Material. For example, it may be reasonable to satisfy the conditions by providing a URI or hyperlink to a resource that includes the required information. If requested by the Licensor, You must remove any of the information required by Section 3(a)(1)(A) to the extent reasonably practicable. If You Share Adapted Material You produce, the Adapter's License You apply must not prevent recipients of the Adapted Material from complying with this Public License. \
Section 4  Sui Generis Database Rights. Where the Licensed Rights include Sui Generis Database Rights that apply to Your use of the Licensed Material: for the avoidance of doubt, Section 2(a)(1) grants You the right to extract, reuse, reproduce, and Share all or a substantial portion of the contents of the database; if You include all or a substantial portion of the database contents in a database in which You have Sui Generis Database Rights, then the database in which You have Sui Generis Database Rights (but not its individual contents) is Adapted Material; and You must comply with the conditions in Section 3(a) if You Share all or a substantial portion of the contents of the database. For the avoidance of doubt, this Section 4 supplements and does not replace Your obligations under this Public License where the Licensed Rights include other Copyright and Similar Rights. \
Section 5  Disclaimer of Warranties and Limitation of Liability. Unless otherwise separately undertaken by the Licensor, to the extent possible, the Licensor offers the Licensed Material as-is and as-available, and makes no representations or warranties of any kind concerning the Licensed Material, whether express, implied, statutory, or other. This includes, without limitation, warranties of title, merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, non-infringement, absence of latent or other defects, accuracy, or the presence or absence of errors, whether or not known or discoverable. Where disclaimers of warranties are not allowed in full or in part, this disclaimer may not apply to You. To the extent possible, in no event will the Licensor be liable to You on any legal theory (including, without limitation, negligence) or otherwise for any direct, special, indirect, incidental, consequential, punitive, exemplary, or other losses, costs, expenses, or damages arising out of this Public License or use of the Licensed Material, even if the Licensor has been advised of the possibility of such losses, costs, expenses, or damages. Where a limitation of liability is not allowed in full or in part, this limitation may not apply to You. The disclaimer of warranties and limitation of liability provided above shall be interpreted in a manner that, to the extent possible, most closely approximates an absolute disclaimer and waiver of all liability. \
Section 6  Term and Termination. This Public License applies for the term of the Copyright and Similar Rights licensed here. However, if You fail to comply with this Public License, then Your rights under this Public License terminate automatically. Where Your right to use the Licensed Material has terminated under Section 6(a), it reinstates: automatically as of the date the violation is cured, provided it is cured within 30 days of Your discovery of the violation; or upon express reinstatement by the Licensor. For the avoidance of doubt, this Section 6(b) does not affect any right the Licensor may have to seek remedies for Your violations of this Public License. For the avoidance of doubt, the Licensor may also offer the Licensed Material under separate terms or conditions or stop distributing the Licensed Material at any time; however, doing so will not terminate this Public License. Sections 1, 5, 6, 7, and 8 survive termination of this Public License. \
Section 7  Other Terms and Conditions. The Licensor shall not be bound by any additional or different terms or conditions communicated by You unless expressly agreed. Any arrangements, understandings, or agreements regarding the Licensed Material not stated herein are separate from and independent of the terms and conditions of this Public License. \
Section 8  Interpretation. For the avoidance of doubt, this Public License does not, and shall not be interpreted to, reduce, limit, restrict, or impose conditions on any use of the Licensed Material that could lawfully be made without permission under this Public License. To the extent possible, if any provision of this Public License is deemed unenforceable, it shall be automatically reformed to the minimum extent necessary to make it enforceable. If the provision cannot be reformed, it shall be severed from this Public License without affecting the enforceability of the remaining terms and conditions. No term or condition of this Public License will be waived and no failure to comply consented to unless expressly agreed to by the Licensor. Nothing in this Public License constitutes or may be interpreted as a limitation upon, or waiver of, any privileges and immunities that apply to the Licensor or You, including from the legal processes of any jurisdiction or authority. Creative Commons is not a party to its public licenses. Notwithstanding, Creative Commons may elect to apply one of its public licenses to material it publishes and in those instances will be considered the Licensor. The text of the Creative Commons public licenses is dedicated to the public domain under the CC0 Public Domain Dedication. Except for the limited purpose of indicating that material is shared under a Creative Commons public license or as otherwise permitted by the Creative Commons policies published at creativecommons.org/policies, Creative Commons does not authorize the use of the trademark Creative Commons or any other trademark or logo of Creative Commons without its prior written consent including, without limitation, in connection with any unauthorized modifications to any of its public licenses or any other arrangements, understandings, or agreements concerning use of licensed material. For the avoidance of doubt, this paragraph does not form part of the public licenses. Creative Commons may be contacted at creativecommons.org. technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the license permits.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( Ares, BSD Operating System, install-sh, Kerberos, WebDAV )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1985-1999 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.\
Export of this software from the United States of America may require a specific license from the United States Government.  It is the responsibility of any person or organization contemplating export to obtain such a license before exporting.  WITHIN THAT CONSTRAINT, permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of M.I.T. not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.  M.I.T. makes no representations about the suitability of this software for any purpose.  It is provided as is without express or implied warranty.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY M.I.T. AS-IS.  M.I.T. DISCLAIMS ALL EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES WITH REGARDS TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  IN NO EVENT SHALL M.I.T. BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Yukihiro Matsumoto ( Ruby )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1993-2001 Yukihiro Matsumoto.  You can obtain the Ruby sources at http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/.\

\b Ruby LIcense:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Ruby is copyrighted free software by Yukihiro Matsumoto <matz@netlab.jp>.  You can redistribute it and/or modify it under either the terms of the GPL (see the file GPL), or the conditions below:\
1. You may make and give away verbatim copies of the source form of the software without restriction, provided that you duplicate all of the original copyright notices and associated disclaimers.  \
2. You may modify your copy of the software in any way, provided that you do at least ONE of the following:\
       a) place your modifications in the Public Domain or otherwise make them Freely Available, such as by posting said modifications to Usenet or an equivalent medium, or by allowing the author to include your modifications in the software.\
       b) use the modified software only within your corporation or organization.\
       c) give non-standard binaries non-standard names, with instructions on where to get the original software distribution.\
       d) make other distribution arrangements with the author.\
3. You may distribute the software in object code or binary form, provided that you do at least ONE of the following:\
       a) distribute the binaries and library files of the software, together with instructions (in the manual page or equivalent) on where to get the original distribution.\
       b) accompany the distribution with the machine-readable source of the software.\
       c) give non-standard binaries non-standard names, with instructions on where to get the original software distribution.\
       d) make other distribution arrangements with the author.\
4. You may modify and include the part of the software into any other software (possibly commercial).  But some files in the distribution are not written by the author, so that they are not under these terms.  For the list of those files and their copying conditions, see the file LEGAL.\
5. The scripts and library files supplied as input to or produced as output from the software do not automatically fall under the copyright of the software, but belong to whomever generated them, and may be sold commercially, and may be aggregated with this software.\
6. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Paul T. McGuire ( pyparsing )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2003-2013, Paul T. McGuire \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Todd C. Miller ( sudo )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1994-1996,1998-2000 Todd C. Miller <Todd.Miller@courtesan.com>. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission from the author.  4. Products derived from this software may not be called Sudo nor may Sudo appear in their names without specific prior written permission from the author.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \'94AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Bram Moolenaar, et al. ( VIM )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2002 Bram Moolernaar, et al.\
VIM LICENSE\
I)  There are no restrictions on distributing unmodified copies of Vim except that they must include this license text. You can also distribute unmodified parts of Vim, likewise unrestricted except that they must include this license text. You are also allowed to include executables that you made from the unmodified Vim sources, plus your own usage\
examples and Vim scripts.\
II) It is allowed to distribute a modified (or extended) version of Vim, including executables and/or source code, when the following four conditions are met:\
    1) This license text must be included unmodified.\
    2) The modified Vim must be distributed in one of the following five ways:\
       a) If you make changes to Vim yourself, you must clearly describe in the distribution how to contact you.  When the maintainer asks you (in any way) for a copy of the modified Vim you distributed, you must make your changes, including source code, available to the maintainer without fee.  The maintainer reserves the right to include your changes in the official version of Vim.  What the maintainer will do with your changes and under what license they will be distributed is negotiable.  If there has been no negotiation then this license, or a later version, also applies to your changes. The current maintainer is Bram Moolenaar <Bram@vim.org>.  If this changes it will be announced in appropriate places (most likely vim.sf.net, www.vim.org and/or comp.editors).  When it is completely impossible to contact the maintainer, the obligation to send him your changes ceases.  Once the maintainer has confirmed that he has received your changes they will not have to be sent again.\
       b) If you have received a modified Vim that was distributed as mentioned under a) you are allowed to further distribute it unmodified, as mentioned at I).  If you make additional changes the text under a) applies to those changes.\
       c) Provide all the changes, including source code, with every copy of the modified Vim you distribute.  This may be done in the form of a context diff.  You can choose what license to use for new code you add.  The changes and their license must not restrict others from making their own changes to the official version of Vim.\
       d) When you have a modified Vim which includes changes as mentioned under c), you can distribute it without the source code for the changes if the following three conditions are met:\
	  - The license that applies to the changes permits you to distribute the changes to the Vim maintainer without fee or restriction, and permits the Vim maintainer to include the changes in the official version of Vim without fee or restriction.\
	  - You keep the changes for at least three years after last distributing the corresponding modified Vim.  When the maintainer or someone who you distributed the modified Vim to asks you (in any way) for the changes within this period, you must make them available to him.\
	  - You clearly describe in the distribution how to contact you.  This contact information must remain valid for at least three years after last distributing the corresponding modified Vim, or as long as possible.\
       e) When the GNU General Public License (GPL) applies to the changes, you can distribute the modified Vim under the GNU GPL version 2 or any later version.\
    3) A message must be added, at least in the output of the :version command and in the intro screen, such that the user of the modified Vim is able to see that it was modified.  When distributing as mentioned under 2)e) adding the message is only required for as far as this does not conflict with the license used for the changes.\
    4) The contact information as required under 2)a) and 2)d) must not be removed or changed, except that the person himself can make corrections.\
III) If you distribute a modified version of Vim, you are encouraged to use the Vim license for your changes and make them available to the maintainer, including the source code.  The preferred way to do this is by e-mail or by uploading the files to a server and e-mailing the URL. If the number of changes is small (e.g., a modified Makefile) e-mailing a context diff will do.  The e-mail address to be used is <maintainer@vim.org>\
IV)  It is not allowed to remove this license from the distribution of the Vim sources, parts of it or from a modified version.  You may use this license for previous Vim releases instead of the license that they came with, at your option.\
\

\b Marcel Moolenaar ( gpt )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2002 Marcel Moolenaar.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR \'94AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Andrew Morgan, et al. ( PAM )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1996 \'96 2001 Andrew Morgan, et al. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms of Linux-PAM, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain any existing copyright notice, and this entire permission notice in its entirety, including the disclaimer of warranties.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce all prior and current copyright notices, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. The name of any author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without their specific prior written permission.  \
ALTERNATIVELY, this product may be distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License, in which case the provisions of the GNU GPL are required INSTEAD OF the above restrictions.  (This clause is necessary due to a potential conflict between the GNU GPL and the restrictions contained in a BSD-style copyright.)\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \'94AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Stephen L. Moshier ( cephes math library )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1984, 1987, 1989 by Stephen L. Moshier.  Used with permission of the author.\
\

\b Mozilla Foundation ( Public Suffix List )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2007-2011 Mozilla Foundation.\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this file, You can obtain one at http://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Alec Muffett ( CrackLib )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2003 Alec David Edward Muffett.\
A Standard Version of CrackLib may be found here: http://crypticide.com/users/alecm/\
LICENCE\
(This document is freely plagiarised from the 'Artistic Licence', distributed as part of the Perl v4.0 kit by Larry Wall, which is available from most major archive sites)\
This documents purpose is to state the conditions under which these Packages (See definition below) viz: Crack, the Unix Password Cracker, and CrackLib, the Unix Password Checking library, which are held in copyright by Alec David Edward Muffett, may be copied, such that the copyright holder maintains some semblance of artistic control over the development of the packages, while giving the users of the package the right to use and distribute the Package in a more-or-less customary fashion, plus the right to make reasonable modifications.\
So there.\
Definitions:\
A Package refers to the collection of files distributed by the Copyright Holder, and derivatives of that collection of files created through textual modification, or segments thereof.\
Standard Version refers to such a Package if it has not been modified,or has been modified in accordance with the wishes of the Copyright Holder.\
Copyright Holder is whoever is named in the copyright or copyrights for the package.\
You is you, if you're thinking about copying or distributing this Package.\
Reasonable copying fee is whatever you can justify on the basis of media cost, duplication charges, time of people involved, and so on. (You will not be required to justify it to the Copyright Holder, but only to the computing community at large as a market that must bear the fee.) \
Freely Available means that no fee is charged for the item itself, though there may be fees involved in handling the item.  It also means that recipients of the item may redistribute it under the same conditions they received it.\
1.  You may make and give away verbatim copies of the source form of the Standard Version of this Package without restriction, provided that you duplicate all of the original copyright notices and associated disclaimers.\
2.  You may apply bug fixes, portability fixes and other modifications derived from the Public Domain or from the Copyright Holder.  A Package modified in such a way shall still be considered the Standard Version. \
3.  You may otherwise modify your copy of this Package in any way, provided that you insert a prominent notice in each changed file stating how and when AND WHY you changed that file, and provided that you do at least ONE of the following:\
	a) place your modifications in the Public Domain or otherwise make them Freely Available, such as by posting said modifications to Usenet or an equivalent medium, or placing the modifications on a major archive site such as uunet.uu.net, or by allowing the Copyright Holder to include your modifications in the Standard Version of the Package.\
	b) use the modified Package only within your corporation or organization.\
	c) rename any non-standard executables so the names do not conflict with standard executables, which must also be provided, and provide separate documentation for each non-standard executable that clearly documents how it differs from the Standard Version.\
	d) make other distribution arrangements with the Copyright Holder.\
4.  You may distribute the programs of this Package in object code or executable form, provided that you do at least ONE of the following:\
	a) distribute a Standard Version of the executables and library files, together with instructions (in the manual page or equivalent) on where to get the Standard Version.\
	b) accompany the distribution with the machine-readable source of the Package with your modifications.\
	c) accompany any non-standard executables with their corresponding Standard Version executables, giving the non-standard executables non-standard names, and clearly documenting the differences in manual pages (or equivalent), together with instructions on where to get the Standard Version.\
	d) make other distribution arrangements with the Copyright Holder.\
5.  You may charge a reasonable copying fee for any distribution of this Package.  You may charge any fee you choose for support of this Package. YOU MAY NOT CHARGE A FEE FOR THIS PACKAGE ITSELF.  However, you may distribute this Package in aggregate with other (possibly commercial) programs as part of a larger (possibly commercial) software distribution provided that YOU DO NOT ADVERTISE this package as a product of your own.\
6.  The name of the Copyright Holder may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
7.  THIS PACKAGE IS PROVIDED AS IS AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\
The End\
\

\b National Electronics and Computer Technology Center (NECTEC) ( Lexitron Thai-English Electronic Dictionary )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9  2003 National Electronics and Computer Technology Center (NECTEC). All rights reserved.\
LICENSE AGREEMENT\
License agreement (LA) is a legal agreement between you and NECTEC. Please read it carefully before redistribution, reproduction or downloading from LEXiTRON services. This license agreement consists of the above copyright notice, definitions, the acceptance of license agreement, terms of use, and disclaimer information. In addition, it provides warranty information, specific terms and conditions that depart from other "free" softwares and "open source" softwares.\
1. Definitions\
	(a)"NECTEC" refers to National Electronics and Computer Technology Center which is an organization under National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Ministry of Science and Technology.\
	(b)"LEXiTRON" refers to a dictionary software and data developed by the Information Research and Development Division, NECTEC, including other software and data released by 	NECTEC.\
	\'a9"Services" refer to any supplies for accessing to a variety of resources, including tools, downloading, communication and collected information, and also any update, enhancement, new features, and/or the addition of any new Web property.\
	(d)"Terms of Use" or "TOU" refers to terms and conditions for utilizing LEXiTRON.\
	(e)"You" refers to any end users and/or government and private contributors who download  program and data from LEXiTRON website in order to reproduce, redistribute and update\
content, material, or any products corresponding to LEXiTRON.\
	(f)"Source Code" refers to program instructions written as an text file; must be translated by a compiler or interpreter or assembler into binary form for a particular computer before execution.\
	(g)"Binary Form" refers to the machine-language output of a compiler that is ready for execution on a particular computer.\
2. Acceptance of License Agreement \
NECTEC reserves the right to update the license agreement at any time without prior notice.\
3. Terms of Use\
Redistribution and use in source and binary form, with or without modification, are permitted provided that all of the following conditions are met:\
	(a)Redistribution of source code must retain the above copyright notice, Acceptance of License Agreement , TOU, and the disclaimer in section 4.\
	(b)Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, the acceptance of terms, TOU, and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials\
provided with the redistribution.\
	\'a9Any product, created and redistributed by you, which is composed of any part from LEXiTRON must include the following acknowledgement:  "This product is created by the adaptation of LEXiTRON developed by NECTEC (http://www.nectec.or.th/)." \
	(d)Products derived from the adaptation of LEXiTRON must not be called "LEXiTRON", nor may "LEXiTRON" appear in their name, without prior written permission of NECTEC.\
	(e)You must not use "LEXiTRON" in a manner likely to cause any damage to NECTEC or third person. NECTEC shall reserve our rights to demand any compensation, retaining fee, costs\
of action and execution, and expenses occured out of such manner.\
	(f)Neither the name of the National Electronics and Computer Technology Center (NECTEC) / National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA) nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote product derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
4. Disclaimer of Warranty\
LEXiTRON, INFORMATION, CONTENT, MATERIAL, OR PRODUCT PROVIDED OR RELEASED BY NECTEC ARE THE COPYRIGHTED WORK OF NECTEC. MOREOVER, LEXiTRON, INFORMATION, CONTENT, MATERIAL, OR PRODUCT PROVIDED OR RELEASED BY NECTEC AND CONTRIBUTORS ARE ALSO ON AN "AS IS" AND "AS AVAILABLE" BASIS. ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL NECTEC OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THE SOFTWARE, INFORMATION CONTENT, MATERIAL, OR PRODUCT, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b National Federation of the Blind ( NFBTRANS )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2002 National Federation of the Blind.\
NFBTRANS is a Grade Two braille translator.  It is freeware and comes with complete C source and documentation.\
 \

\b National ICT Australia Ltd ( NICTA NSSwitch module )
\b0 \
NICTA Public Software Licence Version 1.0\
Copyright \'a9 2004 National ICT Australia Ltd.  All rights reserved.\
By this licence, National ICT Australia Ltd (NICTA) grants permission, free of charge, to any person who obtains a copy of this software and any associated documentation files ("the Software") to use and deal with the Software in source code and binary forms without restriction, with or without modification, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, provided that the following conditions are met:\
- Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimers.\
- Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimers in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
- The name of NICTA may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this Software without specific prior written permission.\
EXCEPT AS EXPRESSLY STATED IN THIS LICENCE AND TO THE FULL EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND NICTA MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS, WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY REPRESENTATIONS, WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS REGARDING THE CONTENTS OR ACCURACY OF THE SOFTWARE, OR OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NONINFRINGEMENT, THE ABSENCE OF LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, OR THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT DISCOVERABLE.\
TO THE FULL EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, IN NO EVENT WILL NICTA BE LIABLE ON ANY LEGAL THEORY (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, NEGLIGENCE) FOR ANY LOSS OR DAMAGE WHATSOEVER, INCLUDING (WITHOUT LIMITATION) LOSS OF PRODUCTION OR OPERATION TIME, LOSS, DAMAGE OR CORRUPTION OF DATA OR RECORDS; OR LOSS OF ANTICIPATED SAVINGS, OPPORTUNITY, REVENUE, PROFIT OR GOODWILL, OR OTHER ECONOMIC LOSS; OR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR EXEMPLARY DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THIS LICENCE, THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OF THE SOFTWARE, EVEN IF NICTA HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.\
If applicable legislation implies warranties or conditions, or imposes obligations or liability on NICTA in respect of the Software that cannot be wholly or partly excluded, restricted or modified, NICTA's liability is limited, to the full extent permitted by the applicable legislation, at its option, to:\
a. in the case of goods, any one or more of the following:\
  i.   the replacement of the goods or the supply of equivalent goods;\
  ii.  the repair of the goods;\
  iii. the payment of the cost of replacing the goods or of acquiring equivalent goods;\
  iv.  the payment of the cost of having the goods repaired; or\
b. in the case of services:\
  i.   the supplying of the services again; or \
  ii.  the payment of the cost of having the services supplied again.\
\

\b National Institutes for the Humanities ( Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2011 National Institutes for the Humanities. All rights reserved.\
Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese, also known as BCCWJ, was developed by the National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics. Used with copyright owner's permission.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b \cf0 PJ Naughter ( AA+ )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2003 - 2012 by PJ Naughter (Web: www.naughter.com, Email: pjna@naughter.com)\
All rights reserved.\
Copyright / Usage Details:\
You are allowed to include the source code in any product (commercial, shareware, freeware or otherwise) when your product is released in binary form. You are allowed to modify the source code in any way you want except you cannot modify the copyright details at the top of each module. If you want to distribute source code with your application, then you are only allowed to distribute versions released by the author. This is to maintain a single distribution point for the source code. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Muthu Nedumaran ( Tamil Auto-correction Dictionary )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2012 Muthu Nedumaran\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 L\'e1szl\'f3 N\'e9meth & Ferenc God\'f3 ( DictHuOxt )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2010, L\'e1szl\'f3 N\'e9meth & Ferenc God\'f3.\
GPL 2.0/LGPL 2.1/MPL 1.1 tri-license\
The contents of this software may be used under the terms of the GNU General Public License Version 2 or later (the "GPL"), or the GNU Lesser General Public License Version 2.1 or later (the "LGPL", see COPYING.LGPL) or (excepting the LGPLed GNU gettext library in the intl/ directory) the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 or later (the "MPL", see COPYING.MPL).\
Software distributed under these licenses is distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the licences for the specific language governing rights and limitations under the licenses.\
\

\b NetBSD ( BSD Operating System )
\b0 \
This product contains software provided by The NetBSD Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.\

\b \
Netscape Communications Corporation ( arena files; parser )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1998-2000 Netscape Communications Corporation.\
For WebCore/platform/Arena.[h|cpp], other contributors are:  Nick Blievers <nickb@adacel.com.au>;  Jeff Hostetler <jeff@nerdone.com>; Tom Rini <trini@kernel.crashing.org>; Raffaele Sena <raff@netwinder.org.\
For WebCore/rendering/RenderLayer.[h|cpp], other contributors are:  Robert O'Callahan <roc+@cs.cmu.edu>; David Baron <dbaron@fas.harvard.edu>; Christian Biesinger <cbiesinger@web.de>; Randall Jesup <rjesup@wgate.com>; Roland Mainz <roland.mainz@informatik.med.uni-giessen.de>; Josh Soref <timeless@mac.com>; Boris Zbarsky <bzbarsky@mit.edu>.\
For WebCore/html/HTMLDocument.cpp, a contributors is:  David Baron <dbaron@fas.harvard.edu>.\
This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2.1 of the License, http://www.fsf.org/copyleft/lesser.html, or (at your option) any later version.\
This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.\
You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307, USA.\
Alternatively, the contents of this file may be used under the terms of either the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1, found at http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/ (the\'a0\'93MPL\'94) or the GNU General Public License Version 2.0, found at http://www.fsf.org/copyleft/gpl.html (the GPL), in which case the provisions of the MPL or the GPL are applicable\'a0instead of those above.\'a0 If you wish to allow use of your version of this file only under the terms of one of those two licenses (the MPL or the GPL) and not to allow others to use your version of this file under the LGPL, indicate your decision by deleting\'a0the provisions above and replace\'a0them with the notice and other provisions required by the MPL or the GPL, as the case may be.\'a0 If you do not delete the provisions above, a recipient may use your version of this file under any of the LGPL, the MPL or the GPL.\

\b \
Netscape Communications Corporation ( NSS - Network Security Services )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1994-2000 Netscape Communications Corporation.
\b \

\b0 The contents of this file are subject to the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 (the License); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/.  Software distributed under the License is distributed on an AS IS basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing rights and limitations under the License. The Original Code is the Netscape security libraries.  The Initial Developer of the Original Code is Netscape Communications Corporation.  Portions created by Netscape are Copyright \'a9 1994-2000 Netscape Communications Corporation.  All Rights Reserved.\
Alternatively, the contents of this file may be used under the terms of the GNU General Public License Version 2 or later (the GPL), in which case the provisions of the GPL are applicable instead of those above.  If you wish to allow use of your version of this file only under the terms of the GPL and not to allow others to use your version of this file under the MPL, indicate your decision by deleting the provisions above and replace them with the notice and other provisions required by the GPL.  If you do not delete the provisions above, a recipient may use your version of this file under either the MPL or the GPL.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Netscape Communications Corporation ( SpiderMonkey, as used in DateMath.cpp )
\b0 \
SpiderMonkey:  Copyright \'a9 1998 Netscape Communications Corporation\
DateMath.cpp:  Copyright \'a9 1999-2000 Harri Porten <porten@kde.org>; Copyright \'a9 2006, 2007 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.\
Version: MPL 1.1/GPL 2.0/LGPL 2.1\
The contents of this file are subject to the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License a http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/\
Software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing rights and limitations under the License.\
The Original Code is Mozilla Communicator client code, released March 31, 1998. \
The Initial Developer of the Original Code is Netscape Communications Corporation.  Portions created by the Initial Developer are Copyright \'a9 1998 the Initial Developer. All Rights Reserved.\
Alternatively, the contents of this file may be used under the terms of either of the GNU General Public License Version 2 or later (the "GPL"), or the GNU Lesser General Public License Version 2.1 or later (the "LGPL"), in which case the provisions of the GPL or the LGPL are applicable instead of those above. If you wish to allow use of your version of this file only under the terms of either the GPL or the LGPL, and not to allow others to use your version of this file under the terms of the MPL, indicate your decision by deleting the provisions above and replace them with the notice and other provisions required by the GPL or the LGPL. If you do not delete the provisions above, a recipient may use your version of this file under the terms of any one of the MPL, the GPL or the LGPL.\
\

\b Network Applied Communication Laboratory, Inc., et al. ( ruby-fcgi )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1998-1999  Network Applied Communication Laboratory, Inc.\
Copyright \'a9 2002 MoonWolf <moonwolf@moonwolf.com>\
Ruby-fcgi is released under the Ruby license.  
\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the Ruby License, please refer to the Yukihiro Matsumoto (Ruby) attribution, where a copy of the Ruby LIcense is included]
\fs24 \

\b \
Network Associates Technology, Inc., CMU, UC Davis, Cambridge Broadband Ltd. ( NET-SNMP )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Various copyrights apply to this package, listed in 3 separate parts below.  Please make sure that you all the parts.  Up until 2001, the project was based at UC Davis, and the first part covers all code written during this time.  From 2001 onwards, the project has been based at SourceForge, and Networks Associates Technology, Inc hold the copyright on behalf of the wider Net-SNMP community, covering all derivative work done since then.  An additional copyright section has been added as Part 3 below also under a BSD license for the work contributed by Cambridge Broadband Ltd. to the project since 2001.\
Code has been contributed to this project by many people over the years it has been in development, and a full list of contributors can be found in the README file under the THANKS section.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 ---- Part 1: CMU/UCD copyright notice: (BSD like) -----\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright 1989, 1991, 1992 by Carnegie Mellon University; Derivative Work - 1996, 1998-2000 Copyright 1996, 1998-2000 The Regents of the University of California. All Rights Reserved.\
Permission to use, copy, modify and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted provided that the above copyright notice appears in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of CMU and The Regents of the University of California not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific written permission.\
CMU AND THE REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS.  IN NO EVENT SHALL CMU OR THE REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM THE LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 ---- Part 2: Networks Associates Technology, Inc copyright notice (BSD) -----
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001, Networks Associates Technology, Inc.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  \
  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  \
  Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
  Neither the name of the NAI Labs nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b ---- Part 3: Cambridge Broadband Ltd. copyright notice (BSD) -----
\b0 \
Portions of this code are copyright \'a9 2001, Cambridge Broadband Ltd. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
  Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
  The name of Cambridge Broadband Ltd. may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b \
Network Associates Technology, Inc., Dag-Erling Sm\'f8rgrav ( OpenPAM )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2002-2003 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.  Copyright \'a9 2004-2007 Dag-Erling Sm\'f8rgrav. All rights reserved.\
This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by ThinkSec AS and Network Associates Laboratories, the Security Research Division of Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035 ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the\'a0documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. \'a0IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
\
NLnet Labs ( Unbound )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2007, NLnet Labs. All rights reserved.\
This software is open source. Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: \
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. \
Neither the name of the NLNET LABS nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx20519\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 NTT, Taku Kudo ( MeCab )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001-2006 Taku Kudo,\'a0Copyright\'a0\'a9\'a02005-2006 Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation.\'a0All rights reserved.\
MeCab is copyrighted free software by Taku Kudo <taku@chasen,org>\'a0and\'a0Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation.\
You can redistribute it and/or modify it under either the terms of the GPL\'a0(see the file GPL), LGPL (see the file LGPL), or the conditions below:\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without\'a0modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,\'a0this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright\'a0notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"\'a0AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE\'a0IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE\'a0ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE\'a0LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR\'a0CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF\'a0SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS\'a0INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN\'a0CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)\'a0ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE\'a0POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\'a0 \'a0\

\b \
Mark Nudelman ( Less )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1984-2005  Mark Nudelman.\
Less License\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 NumPy Developers ( NumPy )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2005, NumPy Developers. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of the NumPy Developers nor the names of any contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Lucas Nussbaum, Stephan Maka, et al. ( XMPP4R )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2005-2008 Lucas Nussbaum, Stephan Maka, and others.  You can obtain the XMPP4R sources at http://download.gna.org/xmpp4r/.\
XMPP4R is copyrighted free software by Lucas Nussbaum <lucas@lucas-nussbaum.net>, Stephan Maka <stephan@spaceboyz.net>, and others.  You can redistribute it and/or modify it under either the terms of the GPL (see COPYING file), or the conditions below:\
1. You may make and give away verbatim copies of the source form of the software without restriction, provided that you duplicate all of the original copyright notices and associated disclaimers.  \
2. You may modify your copy of the software in any way, provided that you do at least ONE of the following:\
       a) place your modifications in the Public Domain or otherwise make them Freely Available, such as by posting said modifications to Usenet or an equivalent medium, or by allowing the author to include your modifications in the software.\
       b) use the modified software only within your corporation or organization.\
       c) rename any non-standard executables so the names do not conflict with standard executables, which must also be provided.\
       d) make other distribution arrangements with the author.\
3. You may distribute the software in object code or binary form, provided that you do at least ONE of the following:\
       a) distribute the executables and library files of the software, together with instructions (in the manual page or equivalent) on where to get the original distribution.\
       b) accompany the distribution with the machine-readable source of the software.\
       c) give non-standard executables non-standard names, with instructions on where to get the original software distribution.\
       d) make other distribution arrangements with the author.\
4. You may modify and include the part of the software into any other software (possibly commercial).  But some files in the distribution are not written by the author, so that they are not under these terms.  They are gc.c(partly), utils.c(partly), regex.[ch], st.[ch] and some files under the ./missing directory.  See each file for the copying condition.\
5. The scripts and library files supplied as input to or produced as output from the software do not automatically fall under the copyright of the software, but belong to whomever generated them, and may be sold commercially, and may be aggregated with this software.\
6. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\
\

\b Naoaki Okazaki ( CQDB )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2007, Naoaki Okazaki. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright\'a0notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the\'a0documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of the Northwestern University, University of Tokyo,\'a0nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote\'a0products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Naoaki Okazaki ( CRFSuite )  \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2007-2009, Naoaki Okazaki.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the names of the authors nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
\
OpenBSD ( BSD Operating System, OpenSSH, LibreSSL )
\b0 \
This product contains software provided by OpenBSD and its contributors.\
\
LibreSSL files are retained under the copyright of the authors. New additions are ISC licensed as per OpenBSD's normal licensing policy, or are placed in the public domain. The OpenSSL code is distributed under the terms of the original OpenSSL licenses which follow: \
[Apple note:  For a copy of the OpenSSL licenses, please refer to the OpenSSL Project attribution, where a copy of the licenses is included]  \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 The OpenLDAP Foundation ( OpenLDAP )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1998-2008 The OpenLDAP Foundation. All rights reserved.\
The OpenLDAP Public License, Version 2.8, August 2003\
Redistribution and use of this software and associated documentation ("Software"), with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions in source form must retain copyright statements and notices, 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce applicable copyright statements and notices, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution, and 3. Redistributions must contain a verbatim copy of this document.\
The OpenLDAP Foundation may revise this license from time to time.  Each revision is distinguished by a version number.  You may use  this Software under terms of this license revision or under the terms of any subsequent revision of the license.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OPENLDAP FOUNDATION AND ITS CONTRIBUTORS \'94AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OPENLDAP FOUNDATION, ITS CONTRIBUTORS, OR THE AUTHOR(S) OR OWNER(S) OF THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
The names of the authors and copyright holders must not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealing in this Software without specific, written prior permission.  Title to copyright in this Software shall at all times remain with copyright holders.  OpenLDAP is a registered trademark of the OpenLDAP Foundation.\
Copyright 1999-2003 The OpenLDAP Foundation, Redwood City, California, USA.  All Rights Reserved.  Permission to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this document is granted.\
\

\b Oracle ( Berkeley DB - as used within OpenLDAP )
\b0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs20 \cf0 [Apple note:  The source code for the DB software can be found at http://www.oracle.com/technology/software/products/berkeley-db/index.html, and the source code for the OpenLDAP software can be found at:  http://www.opensource.apple.com/ or at http://developer.apple.com/darwin/]\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs24 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1990, 2008 Oracle.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. Redistributions in any form must be accompanied by information on how to obtain complete source code for the DB software and any accompanying software that uses the DB software.  The source code must either be included in the distribution or be available for no more than the cost of distribution plus a nominal fee, and must be freely redistributable under reasonable conditions.  For an executable file, complete source code means the source code for all modules it contains.  It does not include source code for modules or files that typically accompany the major components of the operating system on which the executable file runs.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY ORACLE ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT, ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL ORACLE BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
Copyright \'a9 1990, 1993, 1994, 1995 The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditionsare met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors      may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.  \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS  OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
Copyright \'a9 1995, 1996 The President and Fellows of Harvard University.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY HARVARD AND ITS CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL HARVARD OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
ASM: a very small and fast Java bytecode manipulation framework\
Copyright \'a9) 2000-2005 INRIA, France Telecom.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. Neither the name of the copyright holders nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 OpenLink Software, Inc., Ke Jin ( iODBC Driver Manager )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1995 by Ke Jin <kejin@empress.com> \
Copyright \'a9 1996-2006 by OpenLink Software <iodbc@openlinksw.com>  All Rights Reserved.\
This software is released under either the GNU Library General Public License (see LICENSE.LGPL) or the BSD License (see LICENSE.BSD).\
Note that the only valid version of the LGPL license as far as this project is concerned is the original GNU Library General Public License Version 2, dated June 1991.\
While not mandated by the BSD license, any patches you make to the iODBC may be contributed back into the iODBC project at your discretion. Contributions will benefit the Open Source and Data Access community as a whole. Submissions may be made at http://www.iodbc.org.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 GNU LIBRARY GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
\b0 \
Version 2, June 1991\
[Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU Library General Public License, please refer to the Easy Software Products (CUPS) attribution, where a copy of the LGPL is included]\

\b BSD License\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.   3. Neither the name of OpenLink Software Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS AS IS AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL OPENLINK OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,\
OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Open Market, Inc.  ( FastCGI )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1995-1996 Open Market, Inc.\
Portions Copyright \'a9 2005 Daniel Smertnig.\
This FastCGI application library source and object code (the "Software") and its documentation (the "Documentation") are copyrighted by Open Market, Inc ("Open Market").  The following terms apply to all files associated with the Software and Documentation unless explicitly disclaimed in individual files. Open Market permits you to use, copy, modify, distribute, and license this Software and the Documentation solely for the purpose of implementing the FastCGI specification defined by Open Market or derivative specifications publicly endorsed by Open Market and promulgated by an open standards organization and for no other purpose, provided that existing copyright notices are retained in all copies and that this notice is included verbatim in any distributions. No written agreement, license, or royalty fee is required for any of the authorized uses.  Modifications to this Software and Documentation may be copyrighted by their authors and need not follow the licensing terms described here, but the modified Software and Documentation must be used for the sole purpose of implementing the FastCGI specification defined by Open Market or derivative specifications publicly endorsed by Open Market and promulgated by an open standards organization and for no other purpose.  If modifications to this Software and Documentation have new licensing terms, the new terms must protect Open Market's proprietary rights in the Software and Documentation to the same extent as these licensing terms and must be clearly indicated on the first page of each file where they apply. Open Market shall retain all right, title and interest in and to the Software and Documentation, including without limitation all patent, copyright, trade secret and other proprietary rights.\
OPEN MARKET MAKES NO EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTY WITH RESPECT TO THE SOFTWARE OR THE DOCUMENTATION, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION ANY WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  IN NO EVENT SHALL OPEN MARKET BE LIABLE TO YOU OR ANY THIRD PARTY FOR ANY DAMAGES ARISING FROM OR RELATING TO THIS SOFTWARE OR THE DOCUMENTATION, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY INDIRECT, SPECIAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR SIMILAR DAMAGES, INCLUDING LOST PROFITS OR LOST DATA, EVEN IF OPEN MARKET HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF\
SUCH DAMAGES.  THE SOFTWARE AND DOCUMENTATION ARE PROVIDED "AS IS". OPEN MARKET HAS NO LIABILITY IN CONTRACT, TORT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE ARISING OUT OF THIS SOFTWARE OR THE DOCUMENTATION.\
\

\b Open Software Foundation, et al. ( Distributed Computing Environment 1.1 )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1989 OPEN SOFTWARE FOUNDATION, INC., Copyright \'a9 1989 HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY, Copyright \'a9 1989 DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORPORATION.\
To anyone who acknowledges that this file is provided "AS IS" without any express or implied warranty: permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this file for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided that the above copyright notices and this notice appears in all source code copies, and that none of the names of Open Software Foundation, Inc., Hewlett-Packard Company, or Digital Equipment Corporation be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.  Neither Open Software Foundation, Inc., Hewlett-Packard Company, nor Digital Equipment Corporation makes any representations about the suitability of this software for any purpose.\
\

\b Open Software Foundation ( Mach Operating System )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1995, 1994, 1993, 1992, 1991, 1990 Open Software Foundation, Inc. \
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appears in all copies and that both the copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of (OSF) or Open Software Foundation not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.\
OSF DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. IN NO EVENT SHALL OSF BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE, OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\

\b The OpenSSL Project ( OpenSSL )
\b0 \
LICENSE ISSUES\
==============\
The OpenSSL toolkit stays under a dual license, i.e. both the conditions of the OpenSSL License and the original SSLeay license apply to the toolkit. See below for the actual license texts. Actually both licenses are BSD-style Open Source licenses. In case of any license issues related to OpenSSL please contact openssl-core@openssl.org.\

\b OpenSSL License
\b0 \
---------------\
Copyright \'a9 1998-2003 The OpenSSL Project. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgment:  "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"  4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. For written permission, please contact openssl-core@openssl.org.  5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL" nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written permission of the OpenSSL Project.  6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following acknowledgment:  "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
This product includes cryptographic software written by Eric Young (eay@cryptsoft.com).  This product includes software written by Tim Hudson (tjh@cryptsoft.com).\

\b Original SSLeay License
\b0 \
--------------------\
Copyright \'a9 1995-1998 Eric Young (eay@cryptsoft.com). All rights reserved.\
This package is an SSL implementation written by Eric Young (eay@cryptsoft.com).  The implementation was written so as to conform with Netscape's SSL.\
This library is free for commercial and non-commercial use as long as the following conditions are adhered to.  The following conditions apply to all code found in this distribution, be it the RC4, RSA, lhash, DES, etc., code; not just the SSL code.  The SSL documentation included with this distribution is covered by the same copyright terms except that the holder is Tim Hudson (tjh@cryptsoft.com).\
Copyright remains Eric Young's, and as such any Copyright notices in the code are not to be removed.  If this package is used in a product, Eric Young should be given attribution as the author of the parts of the library used.  This can be in the form of a textual message at program startup or   in documentation (online or textual) provided with the package.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement:  "This product includes cryptographic software written by Eric Young (eay@cryptsoft.com)."  The word 'cryptographic' can be left out if the routines from the library being used are not cryptographic related.  4. If you include any Windows specific code (or a derivative thereof) from the apps directory (application code) you must include an acknowledgement:  "This product includes software written by Tim Hudson (tjh@cryptsoft.com)."\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY ERIC YOUNG ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
The license and distribution terms for any publicly available version or derivative of this code cannot be changed.  i.e. this code cannot simply be copied and put under another distribution license [including the GNU Public License.]\
\

\b OpenVision Technologies ( Kerberos Administration System )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1993-1996 OpenVision Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided that the above copyright notice appears in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of OpenVision not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission. OpenVision makes no representations about the suitability of this software for any purpose. It is provided as is without express or implied warranty.\
OPENVISION DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL OPENVISION BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Oxford University Press, Inc. ( dictionary content )
\b0 \
New Oxford American Dictionary \
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2017 by Oxford University Press, Inc. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford American Writer\'92s Thesaurus \
Copyright \'a9 2012, 2016 by Oxford University Press, Inc. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford Dictionary of English\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2017 by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford Thesaurus of English\
Copyright \'a9 2009, 2017 by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Politikens Nudansk Ordbog / Politikens Modern Danish Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2010 Politikens Forlagshus, under licence to Oxford University Press.  All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Prisma woordenboek Nederlands\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2013 Uitgeverij Unieboek | Het Spectrum bv, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Prisma Handwoordenboek Engels\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2013 Uitgeverij Unieboek | Het Spectrum bv, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Multidictionnaire de la langue fran\'e7aise\
Copyright \'a9 2012, 2014 Les \'c9ditions Qu\'e9bec Am\'e9rique Inc., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford-Hachette French Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2007, 2016 Oxford University Press and Hachette Livre.  All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
W\'f6rterbuchsubstanz aus: Duden - Wissensnetz deutsche Sprache\
Copyright \'a9 2011, 2013 Bibliographisches Institut GmbH, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford German Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2008, 2016 Oxford University Press.  All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\

\f2 \uc0\u2352 \u2366 \u2332 \u2346 \u2366 \u2354 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u2361 \u2367 \u2344 \u2381 \u2342 \u2368 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u2358 \u2348 \u2381 \u2342 \u2325 \u2379 \u2358 
\f0  / Rajpal Hindi Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2011 Rajpal & Sons, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Un dizionario italiano da un affiliato di Oxford University Press\
Copyright \'a9 2005, 2013 Mondadori Education S.p.A., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford Paravia Il Dizionario inglese - italiano/italiano - inglese / Oxford - Paravia Italian Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2016 Oxford-Paravia Italian Dictionary, Pearson Italia, Milano - Torino, and Oxford University Press.  All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f3 \cf0 \'a5\'b9\'a9\'60\'a5\'d1\'a9\'60\'b4\'f3\'b4\'c7\'c1\'d6
\f0  / Super Daijirin Japanese Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2013 Sanseido Co., Ltd., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\

\f3 \'a5\'a6\'a5\'a3\'a5\'ba\'a5\'c0\'a5\'e0\'d3\'a2\'ba\'cd\'b4\'c7\'b5\'e4
\f0  / The Wisdom English-Japanese Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2007, 2013 Sanseido Company Ltd., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\

\f3 \'a5\'a6\'a5\'a3\'a5\'ba\'a5\'c0\'a5\'e0\'ba\'cd\'d3\'a2\'b4\'c7\'b5\'e4
\f0  / The Wisdom Japanese-English Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2007, 2013 Sanseido Company Ltd., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f4 \cf0 \'b4\'ba\'bf\'a1\'c0\'cc\'bd\'ba
\f0  
\f4 \'b1\'b9\'be\'ee\'bb\'e7\'c0\'fc
\f0  / New Ace Korean Language Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2012 DIOTEK, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\

\f4 \'b4\'ba\'bf\'a1\'c0\'cc\'bd\'ba
\f0  
\f4 \'bf\'b5\'c7\'d1\'bb\'e7\'c0\'fc
\f0  / New Ace English-Korean Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2011, 2014 DIOTEK Co., Ltd., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\

\f4 \'b4\'ba\'bf\'a1\'c0\'cc\'bd\'ba
\f0  
\f4 \'c7\'d1\'bf\'b5\'bb\'e7\'c0\'fc
\f0  / New Ace Korean-English Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2011, 2014 DIOTEK Co., Ltd., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Norsk Ordbok / Norwegian Monolingual Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2012, 2014 Kunnskapsforlaget ANS, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Dicion\'e1rio de Portugu\'eas licenciado para Oxford University Press\
Copyright \'a9 2012 Editora Objetiva, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford Portuguese Dictionary \
Copyright \'a9 2015, 2016 by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\uc0\u1057 . \u1048 . \u1054 \u1078 \u1077 \u1075 \u1086 \u1074  \'ab\u1058 \u1086 \u1083 \u1082 \u1086 \u1074 \u1099 \u1081  \u1089 \u1083 \u1086 \u1074 \u1072 \u1088 \u1100  \u1088 \u1091 \u1089 \u1089 \u1082 \u1086 \u1075 \u1086  \u1103 \u1079 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \'bb  / S.I. Ojegov: Explanatory Dictionary of the Russian Language\
Copyright \'a9 2012 "Universe and Education" Publishing House Ltd., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford Russian Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2000, 2016 by Oxford University Press.  All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f3 \cf0 \'cf\'d6\'b4\'fa\'ba\'ba\'d3\'ef\'b9\'e6\'b7\'b6\'b4\'ca\'b5\'e4
\f0  / The Standard Dictionary of Contemporary Chinese\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2013 Oxford University Press and Foreign Language Teaching and Research Publishing, Co., Ltd. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\

\f3 \'c5\'a3\'bd\'f2\'d3\'a2\'ba\'ba\'ba\'ba\'d3\'a2\'b4\'ca\'b5\'e4
\f0  / Oxford Chinese Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2016 Oxford University Press and Foreign Language Teaching and Research Publishing Co., Ltd. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Diccionario General de la Lengua Espa\'f1ola Vox\
Copyright \'a9 2012, 2013 Larousse Editorial, S.L., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Gran Diccionario Oxford - Espa\'f1ol-Ingl\'e9s \'95 Ingl\'e9s-Espa\'f1ol / Oxford Spanish Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2008, 2016 Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
NE Ordbok / NE Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2013 Nationalencyklopedin, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f5 \cf0 \'be\'a8\'b9\'d2\'b9\'d8\'a1\'c3\'c1\'e4\'b7\'c2
\f0  
\f5 \'a9\'ba\'d1\'ba\'b7\'d1\'b9\'ca\'c1\'d1\'c2\'e1\'c5\'d0\'ca\'c1\'ba\'d9\'c3\'b3\'ec
\f0  / Complete Thai Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2009 Se-Education PLC, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f3 \cf0 \'ce\'e5\'c4\'cf\'87\'f8\'d5\'5a\'bb\'ee\'d3\'c3\'de\'6f\'b5\'e4
\f0  / Wu-Nan Chinese Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 1987, 2015 Wu-Nan Book Inc. under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. \
-------------------------------\
Arkada\uc0\u351  T\'fcrk\'e7e S\'f6zl\'fck\
Copyright \'a9 2012 Arkada\uc0\u351  Publishing LTD, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\pard\tx14759\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 Paratype Ltd ( PT Mono Font, PT Serif Font )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2009, ParaType Ltd. All Rights Reserved.\
LICENSING AGREEMENT for the fonts with Original Name: PT Sans, PT Serif, PT Mono. Version 1.3 - January 20, 2012\
GRANT OF LICENSE\uc0\u8232 ParaType Ltd grants you the right to use, copy, modify the fonts and distribute modified and unmodified copies of the fonts by any means, including placing on Web servers for free downloading, embedding in documents and Web pages, bundling with commercial and non commercial products, if it does not conflict with the conditions listed below:\
- You may bundle the font with commercial software, but you may not sell the fonts by themselves. They are free.\
- You may distribute the fonts in modified or unmodified version only together with this Licensing Agreement and with above copyright notice. You have no right to modify the text of Licensing Agreement. It can be placed in a separate text file or inserted into the font file, but it must be easily viewed by users.\
- You may not distribute modified version of the font under the Original name or a combination of Original name with any other words without explicit written permission from ParaType.\
TERMINATION & TERRITORY\uc0\u8232 This license has no limits on time and territory, but it becomes null and void if any of the above conditions are not met.\
DISCLAIMER\uc0\u8232 THE FONT SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT, PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR OTHER RIGHT. IN NO EVENT SHALL PARATYPE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE FONT SOFTWARE OR FROM OTHER DEALINGS IN THE FONT SOFTWARE.\
ParaType Ltd http://www.paratype.ru\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Gian-Carlo Pascutto ( Sjeng engine )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2003 Gian-Carlo Pascutto.\
The Sjeng engine is free software and is licensed under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL) as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the Sjeng engine software under the terms of GPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple. The Sjeng engine software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GPL for more details; a copy of the GPL is included with this product.  [Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU GPL Version 2, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]  \
\

\b Aaron Patterson et al. ( Nokogiri, psych )
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 Copyright \'a9 2008-2012 Aaron Patterson, Mike Dalessio, Charles Nutter, Sergio Arbeo, Patrick Mahoney, Yoko Harada. (Nokogiri)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Copyright \'a9 2009 Aaron Patterson, et al.  (psych)\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Colin Percival ( bspatch, bsdiff )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2003 Colin Percival\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 BSD Protection License, February 2002
\b0 \
Preamble\
--------\
The Berkeley Software Distribution ("BSD") license has proven very effective over the years at allowing for a wide spread of work throughout both commercial and non-commercial products.  For programmers whose primary intention is to improve the general quality of available software, it is arguable that there is no better license than the BSD license, as it permits improvements to be used wherever they will help, without idealogical or metallic constraint.\
This is of particular value to those who produce reference implementations of proposed standards: The case of TCP/IP clearly illustrates that freely and universally available implementations leads the rapid acceptance of standards -- often even being used instead of a de jure standard (eg, OSI network models).\
With the rapid proliferation of software licensed under the GNU General Public License, however, the continued success of this role is called into question.  Given that the inclusion of a few lines of "GPL-tainted" work into a larger body of work will result in restricted distribution -- and given that further work will likely build upon the "tainted" portions, making them difficult to remove at a future date -- there are inevitable circumstances where authors would, in order to protect their goal of providing for the widespread usage of their work, wish to guard against such "GPL-taint".\
In addition, one can imagine that companies which operate by producing and selling (possibly closed-source) code would wish to protect themselves against the rise of a GPL-licensed competitor.  While under existing licenses this would mean not releasing their code under any form of open license, if a license existed under which they could incorporate any improvements back into their own (commercial) products then they might be far more willing to provide for non-closed distribution.\
For the above reasons, we put forth this "BSD Protection License": A license designed to retain the freedom granted by the BSD license to use licensed works in a wide variety of settings, both non-commercial and commercial, while protecting the work from having future contributors restrict that freedom.\
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution, and modification follow.\
BSD PROTECTION LICENSE\
TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION, AND MODIFICATION\
----------------------------------------------------------------\
0. Definitions.\
   a) "Program", below, refers to any program or work distributed under the terms of this license.\
   b) A "work based on the Program", below, refers to either the Program or any derivative work under copyright law.\
   c) "Modification", below, refers to the act of creating derivative works.\
   d) "You", below, refers to each licensee.\
1. Scope.\
   This license governs the copying, distribution, and modification of the Program.  Other activities are outside the scope of this license; The act of running the Program is not restricted, and the output from the Program is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the Program.\
2. Verbatim copies.\
   You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice; keep intact all the notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty; and give any other recipients of the Program a copy of this License along with the Program.\
3. Modification and redistribution under closed license.\
   You may modify your copy or copies of the Program, and distribute  the resulting derivative works, provided that you meet the\
   following conditions:\
   a) The copyright notice and disclaimer on the Program must be reproduced and included in the source code, documentation, and/or other materials provided in a manner in which such notices are normally distributed.\
   b) The derivative work must be clearly identified as such, in order that it may not be confused with the original work.\
   c) The license under which the derivative work is distributed must expressly prohibit the distribution of further derivative works.\
4. Modification and redistribution under open license.\
   You may modify your copy or copies of the Program, and distribute the resulting derivative works, provided that you meet the\
   following conditions:\
   a) The copyright notice and disclaimer on the Program must be reproduced and included in the source code, documentation, and/or other materials provided in a manner in which such notices are normally distributed.\
   b) You must clearly indicate the nature and date of any changes made to the Program.  The full details need not necessarily be included in the individual modified files, provided that each modified file is clearly marked as such and instructions are included on where the full details of the modifications may be found.\
   c) You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that in whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or any part thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to all third parties under the terms of this License.\
5. Implied acceptance.\
   You may not copy or distribute the Program or any derivative works except as expressly provided under this license.  Consequently, any such action will be taken as implied acceptance of the terms of this license.\
6. NO WARRANTY.\
   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT, EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Benjamin Peterson ( six )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2010-2013, Benjamin Peterson \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Pham Kim Long ( UniKey Vietnamese Input Method )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006 Pham Kim Long.  \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Thomas A. Phelps ( rman/PolyglotMan )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1993 Thomas A. Phelps. All rights reserved.\
The rman code is distributed under the Artistic License (http://www.opensource.org/licenses/artistic-license.html).\
\

\b The PHP Group ( php )
\b0 \
The PHP License, version 3.01 Copyright \'a9 1999 - 2012 The PHP Group. All rights reserved. \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, is permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. The name "PHP" must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. For written permission, please contact group@php.net. 4. Products derived from this software may not be called "PHP", nor may "PHP" appear in their name, without prior written permission from group@php.net. You may indicate that your software works in conjunction with PHP by saying "Foo for PHP" instead of calling it "PHP Foo" or "phpfoo" 5. The PHP Group may publish revised and/or new versions of the license from time to time. Each version will be given a distinguishing version number. Once covered code has been published under a particular version of the license, you may always continue to use it under the terms of that version. You may also choose to use such covered code under the terms of any subsequent version of the license published by the PHP Group. No one other than the PHP Group has the right to modify the terms applicable to covered code created under this License. 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following acknowledgment: "This product includes PHP software, freely available from <http://www.php.net/software/>". THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE PHP DEVELOPMENT TEAM ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE PHP DEVELOPMENT TEAM OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. \
his software consists of voluntary contributions made by many individuals on behalf of the PHP Group. The PHP Group can be contacted via Email at group@php.net. For more information on the PHP Group and the PHP project, please see <http://www.php.net>. PHP includes the Zend Engine, freely available at <http://www.zend.com>.
\b \
\
The PHP Group ( PHP, apache_mod_php )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1999-2002 The PHP Group. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, is permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. The name PHP must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior permission from the PHP Group.  This does not apply to add-on libraries or tools that work in conjunction with PHP.  In such a case the PHP name may be used to indicate that the product supports PHP.  4. The PHP Group may publish revised and/or new versions of the license from time to time. Each version will be given a distinguishing version number.  Once covered code has been published under a particular version of the license, you may always continue to use it under the terms of that version. You may also choose to use such covered code under the terms of any subsequent version of the license published by the PHP Group. No one other than the PHP Group has the right to modify the terms applicable to covered code created under this License.  5. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following acknowledgment: This product includes PHP, freely available from http://www.php.net/.  6. The software incorporates the Zend Engine, a product of Zend Technologies, Ltd. (Zend). The Zend Engine is licensed to the PHP Association (pursuant to a grant from Zend that can be found at http://www.php.net/license/ZendGrant/) for distribution to you under this license agreement, only as a part of PHP.  In the event that you separate the Zend Engine (or any portion thereof) from the rest of the software, or modify the Zend Engine, or any portion thereof, your use of the separated or modified Zend Engine software shall not be governed by this license, and instead shall be governed by the license set forth at http://www.zend.com/license/ZendLicense/. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE PHP DEVELOPMENT TEAM ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE PHP DEVELOPMENT TEAM OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Phusion ( Phusion Passenger )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2008 Phusion
\fs12 .
\fs24 \
Phusion Passenger is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL) version 2, and *only* version 2 (i.e. not version 3 or any later versions). In addition to the GNU General Public License v2 licensing terms, we explicitly grant you the permission to run any application on top of Phusion Passenger, regardless of the application's own licensing terms. The application will not be bound to the terms of the GPL in any way. That is, the GPL only applies to Phusion Passenger itself, and not to applications that are run through Phusion Passenger. We also explicitly allow Apache to load the Phusion Passenger Apache module, without Apache or any other loaded modules needing to be released under the terms of the GPL.  
\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU GPL Version 2, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]
\fs24 \
\

\b Thomas Pirche ( pycrc )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006-2010, Thomas Pircher <tehpeh@gmx.net>\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Pixar, et al. ( tif_pixarfilm.c )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1988, 1990 by Sam Leffler. Copyright \'a9 1992 by Pixar. All rights reserved.\
This file is provided for unrestricted use provided that this legend is included on all tape media and as a part of the software program in whole or part.  Users may copy, modify or distribute this file at will.\
TIFF Library.  Modified Rev 5.0 Lempel-Ziv & Welch Compression for film output.\
This code is derived from Sam Leffler's TIFF LZW code which was derived from the compress program whose code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by James A. Woods, derived from original work by Spencer Thomas and Joseph Orost.\
The original Berkeley copyright notice appears at the end in its entirety.\
Copyright \'a9 1985, 1986 The Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved.\
This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by James A. Woods, derived from original work by Spencer Thomas and Joseph Orost.  Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are duplicated in all such forms and that any documentation, advertising materials, and other materials related to such distribution and use acknowledge that the software was developed by the University of California, Berkeley.  The name of the University may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Zdenko Podobn\'fd ( sk-spell )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2011, Zdenko Podobn\'fd. 
\b \

\b0 This data are release under these licenses:\
* The GNU General Public License (GPL) Version 2, June 1991\
* GNU Lesser General Public License Version 2.1, February 1999\
* Mozilla Public License 1.1 (MPL 1.1)\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Boris Popov ( smb )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2000, 2001 Boris Popov. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by Boris Popov.  4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b PostgreSQL Global Development Group and The Regents of the University of California ( PostgreSQL )
\b0 \
PostgreSQL Database Management System (formerly known as Postgres, then as Postgres95)\
Portions Copyright \'a9 1996-2009, PostgreSQL Global Development Group\
Portions Copyright \'a9 1994, The Regents of the University of California\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose, without fee, and without a written agreement is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph and the following two paragraphs appear in all copies.\
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA BE LIABLE TO ANY PARTY FOR DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, INCLUDING LOST PROFITS, ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE AND ITS DOCUMENTATION, EVEN IF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMS ANY WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. \'a0THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, AND THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA HAS NO OBLIGATIONS TO PROVIDE MAINTENANCE, SUPPORT, UPDATES, ENHANCEMENTS, OR MODIFICATIONS.
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Dr. Martin Porter, et al ( Snowball Stemmer Data Set )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001, Dr Martin Porter, and (for the Java developments) Copyright \'a9 2002, Richard Boulton. \
All the software given out on this Snowball site is covered by the BSD License (see http://www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license.html ), with Copyright \'a9 2001, Dr Martin Porter, and (for the Java developments) Copyright \'a9 2002, Richard Boulton. Essentially, all this means is that you can do what you like with the code, except claim another Copyright for it, or claim that it is issued under a different license. The software is also issued without warranties, which means that if anyone suffers through its use, they cannot come back and sue you. You also have to alert anyone to whom you give the Snowball software to the fact that it is covered by the BSD license. We have not bothered to insert the licensing arrangement into the text of the Snowball software.\
\

\b Niels Provos and Nick Mathewson ( libevent )
\b0 \
Libevent is available for use under the following license, commonly known as the 3-clause (or "modified") BSD license:\
==============================\
Copyright \'a9 2000-2007 Niels Provos <provos@citi.umich.edu>\
Copyright \'a9 2007-2010 Niels Provos and Nick Mathewson\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions\
are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
==============================\
Portions of Libevent are based on works by others, also made available by them under the three-clause BSD license above.  The copyright notices are available in the corresponding source files; the license is as above.  Here's a list:\
log.c:\
   Copyright \'a9 2000 Dug Song <dugsong@monkey.org>\
   Copyright \'a9 1993 The Regents of the University of California.\
strlcpy.c:\
   Copyright \'a9 1998 Todd C. Miller <Todd.Miller@courtesan.com>\
win32select.c:\
   Copyright \'a9 2003 Michael A. Davis <mike@datanerds.net>\
evport.c:\
   Copyright \'a9 2007 Sun Microsystems\
ht-internal.h:\
   Copyright \'a9 2002 Christopher Clark\
minheap-internal.h:\
   Copyright \'a9 2006 Maxim Yegorushkin <maxim.yegorushkin@gmail.com>\
==============================\
\

\b Purdue University ( lsof )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1994 Purdue Research Foundation, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907.  All rights reserved.  Written by Victor A. Abell.  This software is not subject to any license of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company or the Regents of the University of California.\
Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose on any computer system, and to alter it and redistribute it freely, subject to the following restrictions: 1. Neither the authors nor Purdue University are responsible for any consequences of the use of this software. 2. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented, either by explicit claim or by omission.  Credit to the authors and Purdue University must appear in documentation and sources. 3. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be misrepresented as being the original software. 4. This notice may not be removed or altered.\
\

\b Python Software Foundation ( Python )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001 Python Software Foundation. All rights reserved.\
PSF LICENSE AGREEMENT FOR PYTHON 2.2\
1. This LICENSE AGREEMENT is between the Python Software Foundation (PSF), and the Individual or Organization (Licensee) accessing and otherwise using Python 2.2 software in source or binary form and its associated documentation.  2. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License Agreement, PSF hereby grants Licensee a nonexclusive, royalty-free, world-wide license to reproduce, analyze, test, perform and/or display publicly, prepare derivative works, distribute, and otherwise use Python 2.2 alone or in any derivative version, provided, however, that PSF's License Agreement and PSF's notice of copyright, i.e., Copyright \'a9 2001 Python Software Foundation; All Rights Reserved are retained in Python 2.2 alone or in any derivative version prepared by Licensee.  3. In the event Licensee prepares a derivative work that is based on or incorporates Python 2.2 or any part thereof, and wants to make the derivative work available to others as provided herein, then Licensee hereby agrees to include in any such work a brief summary of the changes made to Python 2.2.  4. PSF is making Python 2.2 available to Licensee on an AS IS basis.  PSF MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED.  BY WAY OF EXAMPLE, BUT NOT LIMITATION, PSF MAKES NO AND DISCLAIMS ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR THAT THE USE OF PYTHON 2.2 WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY THIRD PARTY RIGHTS.  5. PSF SHALL NOT BE LIABLE TO LICENSEE OR ANY OTHER USERS OF PYTHON 2.2 FOR ANY INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR LOSS AS A RESULT OF MODIFYING, DISTRIBUTING, OR OTHERWISE USING PYTHON 2.2, OR ANY DERIVATIVE THEREOF, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY THEREOF.  6. This License Agreement will automatically terminate upon a material breach of its terms and conditions.  7. Nothing in this License Agreement shall be deemed to create any relationship of agency, partnership, or joint venture between PSF and Licensee.  This License Agreement does not grant permission to use PSF trademarks or trade name in a trademark sense to endorse or promote products or services of Licensee, or any third party.  8. By copying, installing or otherwise using Python 2.2, Licensee agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of this License Agreement.\

\b Python ( dateutil - 
\b0 Extensions to the standard Python date/time module as used within Python.)\
Copyright \'a9 2003-2011 - Gustavo Niemeyer <gustavo@niemeyer.net> Copyright \'a9 2012 - Tomi Pievilnen <tomi.pievilainen@iki.fi> All rights reserved. \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: \
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. \
* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Goran Rakic ( dict-sr )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2010, Goran Rakic. \
Serbian spellcheck dictionary is released under disjunctive tri-licence GNU LGPL version 2.1 or later / MPL version 1.1 or later / GNU GPL version 2 or later giving you the choice of one of the three sets of free software licensing terms. You can also use the dictionary under the terms of Creative Commons BY-SA 3.0 Unported licence.
\b \
\
Glen Randers-Pehrson, et al. ( png )
\b0 \
libpng version 1.0.8 - July 24, 2000\
Copyright \'a9 1998-2000 Glenn Randers-Pehrson, Copyright \'a9 1996, 1997 Andreas Dilger, Copyright \'a9 1995, 1996 Guy Eric Schalnat, Group 42, Inc.\
COPYRIGHT NOTICE, DISCLAIMER, and LICENSE: \
For the purposes of this copyright and license, Contributing Authors is defined as the following set of individuals:  Andreas Dilger, Dave Martindale, Guy Eric Schalnat, Paul Schmidt, Tim Wegner.\
The PNG Reference Library is supplied AS IS.  The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc. disclaim all warranties, expressed or implied including, without limitation, the warranties of merchantability and of fitness for any purpose.  The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc. assume no liability for direct, indirect, incidental, special,  exemplary, or consequential damages, which may result from the use of the PNG Reference Library, even if advised of the possibility of such damage.\
Permission is hereby granted to use, copy, modify, and distribute this source code, or portions hereof, for any purpose, without fee, subject to the following restrictions:  1. The origin of this source code must not be misrepresented.  2. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such and must not be misrepresented as being the original source.  3. This Copyright notice may not be removed or altered from any source or altered source distribution.  The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc. specifically permit, without fee, and encourage the use of this source code as a component to supporting the PNG file format in commercial products.  If you use this source code in a product, acknowledgment is not required but would be appreciated.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Glenn Randers-Pehrson, Greg Roelofs ( pngcrush )
\b0 \
COPYRIGHT NOTICE, DISCLAIMER, AND LICENSE:\
If you have modified this source, you may insert additional notices immediately after this sentence.\
Copyright \'a9 1998-2002,2006 Glenn Randers-Pehrson (glennrp@users.sf.net).  Copyright \'a9 2005 Greg Roelofs\
The pngcrush computer program is supplied "AS IS". \'a0The Author disclaims all warranties, expressed or implied, including, without limitation, the warranties of merchantability and of fitness for any purpose. \'a0The Author assumes no liability for direct, indirect, incidental, special, exemplary, or consequential damages, which may result from the use of the computer program, even if advised of the possibility of such damage. There is no warranty against interference with your enjoyment of the computer program or against infringement. \'a0There is no warranty that my efforts or the computer program will fulfill any of your particular purposes or needs. \'a0This computer program is provided with all faults, and the entire risk of satisfactory quality, performance, accuracy, and effort is with the user.\'a0\
Permission is hereby irrevocably granted to everyone to use, copy, modify, and distribute this source code, or portions hereof, or executable programs compiled from it, for any purpose, without payment of any fee, subject to the following restrictions:\
1. The origin of this source code must not be misrepresented.\
2. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such and must not be misrepresented as being the original source.\
3. This Copyright notice, disclaimer, and license may not be removed\'a0or altered from any source or altered source distribution.\
\

\b Rapptz and contributors ( Sol2 )
\b0 \
The MIT License (MIT)\
Copyright \'a9 2013-2015 Rapptz and contributors\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Eric S. Raymond, Greshon Elber, Toshio Kuratomi ( giflib )
\b0 \
The GIFLIB distribution is Copyright \'a9 1997 Eric S. Raymond.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER  LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Red Hat, Inc. ( libffi, Popt )\

\b0 libffi - Copyright \'a9 1996-2003  Red Hat, Inc.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the ``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL CYGNUS SOLUTIONS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 Popt:  Copyright \'a9 1998  Red Hat Software\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE X CONSORTIUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of the X Consortium shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization from the X Consortium.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Michael Richardson, et al. ( FIPS-186-2 SHA1-based PRF )
\b0 \
fips186prf.c \'a0An implementation of the FIPS-186-2 SHA1-based PRF. \
The development of the EAP/SIM support was funded by Internet Foundation Austria (http://www.nic.at/ipa). This code was written from scratch by Michael Richardson, and it is dual licensed under both GPL and BSD. 
\fs20 [Apple note: Apple uses this code under the BSD license]
\fs24 \

\b GPL notice: \'a0
\b0 \'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modifyit under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. \'a0See the GNU General Public License for more details. You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301, USA. 
\fs20 [Apple note: For a copy of the GNU General Public License, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]
\fs24 \

\b BSD notice: \'a0
\b0 \'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the\'a0documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. \'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\
Copyright \'a9 2003 \'a0Michael Richardson <mcr@sandelman.ottawa.on.ca>.  Copyright \'a9 2006 \'a0The FreeRADIUS server project.\

\b SHA-1 in C \'a0
\b0 \'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\
By Steve Reid <steve@edmweb.com> 100% Public Domain \'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0
\b \
\
Luigi Rizzo, Alessandro Cerri, et al. ( if_llatbl.c )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2004 Luigi Rizzo, Alessandro Cerri. All rights reserved.\
Copyright \'a9 2004-2008 Qing Li. All rights reserved.\
Copyright \'a9 2008 Kip Macy. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
Calum Robinson, Brian Wade ( Flurry screensaver )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001 Calum Robinson, Brian Wade. All rights reserved.  \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. Neither the names of the authors nor the names of their contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS AS IS AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Rospell Team ( rospell )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2005-2009, Rospell Team.\
GPL 2.0/LGPL 2.1/MPL 1.1 tri-license\
The contents of this software may be used under the terms of the GNU General Public License Version 2 or later (see COPYING.GPL), or the GNU Lesser General Public License Version 2.1 or later (the "LGPL", see COPYING.LGPL) or (excepting the LGPLed GNU gettext library in the\
intl/ directory) the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 or later (the "MPL", see COPYING.MPL).\
Software distributed under these licenses is distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the licences for the specific language governing rights and limitations under the licenses.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Ludovic Rousseau, et al. ( CCID driver )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2003-2008 Ludovic Rousseau, Carlos Prados, Olaf Kirch.\
This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2.1 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. \
This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Lesser General Public License for more details. You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307  USA.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 RSA Data Security, Inc. ( MD4.H - header file for MD4C.C, MD5, RC4, BIND (DNSSAFE) )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1991-2, RSA Data Security, Inc. Created 1991. All rights reserved.\
License to copy and use this software is granted provided that it is identified as the RSA Data Security, Inc. MD4 Message-Digest Algorithm in all material mentioning or referencing this software or this function.\
License is also granted to make and use derivative works provided that such works are identified as derived from the RSA Data Security, Inc. MD4 Message-Digest Algorithm in all material mentioning or referencing the derived work.  RSA Data Security, Inc. makes no representations concerning either the merchantability of this software or the suitability of this software for any particular purpose. It is provided as is without express or implied warranty of any kind.  These notices must be retained in any copies of any part of this documentation and/or software.\
MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm \'a9 1991-1992 RSA Data Security, Inc.\
RC4 Algorithm \'a9 RSA Data Security, Inc.\
This BIND software includes the DNSsafe software from RSA Data Security, Inc., which is copyrighted software that can only be distributed under the terms of this license agreement. The DNSsafe software cannot be used or distributed separately from the BIND software.  You only have the right to use it or distribute it as a bundled, integrated product.  The DNSsafe software can ONLY be used to provide authentication for resource records in the Domain Name System, as specified in RFC 2065 and successors.  You cannot modify the BIND software to use the DNSsafe software for other purposes, or to make its cryptographic functions available to end-users for other uses.  If you modify the DNSsafe software itself, you cannot modify its documented API, and you must grant RSA Data Security the right to use, modify, and distribute your modifications, including the right to use any patents or other intellectual property that your modifications depend upon.  You must not remove, alter, or destroy any of RSA's copyright notices or license information.  When distributing the software to the Federal Government, it must be licensed to them as commercial computer software protected under 48 CFR 12.212 of the FAR, or 48 CFR 227.7202.1 of the DFARS.  You must not violate United States export control laws by distributing the DNSsafe software or information about it, when such distribution is prohibited by law.\
THE DNSSAFE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY WHATSOEVER.  RSA HAS NO OBLIGATION TO SUPPORT, CORRECT, UPDATE OR MAINTAIN THE RSA SOFTWARE.  RSA DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR STATUTORY, AS TO ANY MATTER WHATSOEVER, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS.\
If you desire to use DNSsafe in ways that these terms do not permit, please contact RSA Data Security, Inc., 100 Marine Parkway, Redwood City, California 94065, USA, to discuss alternate licensing arrangements.\
\

\b Changwoo Ryu ( spellcheck-ko )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2008, 2009, 2010, Changwoo Ryu. All Rights Reserved.\
Version: MPL 1.1/GPL 2.0/LGPL 2.1\
The contents of this file are subject to the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc9 http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/}} Software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing rights and limitations under the License.\
The Original Code is Hunspell Korean spellchecking dictionary. The Initial Developer of the Original Code is Changwoo Ryu. Portions created by the Initial Developer are Copyright \'a9 2008, 2009, 2010 the Initial Developer. All Rights Reserved.\
Contributor(s): Changwoo Ryu <cwryu%debian.org> Namhyung Kim <namhyung%gmail.com>\
Alternatively, the contents of this file may be used under the terms of either the GNU General Public License Version 2 or later (the "GPL"), or the GNU Lesser General Public License Version 2.1 or later (the "LGPL"), in which case the provisions of the GPL or the LGPL are applicable instead\
of those above. If you wish to allow use of your version of this file only under the terms of either the GPL or the LGPL, and not to allow others to use your version of this file under the terms of the MPL, indicate your decision by deleting the provisions above and replace them with the notice and other provisions required by the GPL or the LGPL. If you do not delete the provisions above, a recipient may use your version of this file under the terms of any one of the MPL, the GPL or the LGPL.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Toshinori Sato ( mecab-ipadic-NEologd )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2015-2016 Toshinori Sato (@overlast) \
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License\'94); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b \cf0 Guy Eric Schalnat, Group 42, Inc., Andreas Dilger and Glenn Randers-Pehrson ( libpng )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1995, 1996 Guy Eric Schalnat, Group 42, Inc.\
Copyright \'a9 1996, 1997 Andreas Dilger\
Copyright \'a9 1998, 1999, 2000-2002, 2004, 2006-2012 Glenn Randers-Pehrson\
This copy of the libpng notices is provided for your convenience.  In case of any discrepancy between this copy and the notices in the file png.h that is included in the libpng distribution, the latter shall prevail.\
COPYRIGHT NOTICE, DISCLAIMER, and LICENSE:\
If you modify libpng you may insert additional notices immediately following this sentence.\
This code is released under the libpng license.\
libpng versions 1.2.6, August 15, 2004, through 1.5.12, July 11, 2012, are Copyright \'a9 2004, 2006-2012 Glenn Randers-Pehrson, and are distributed according to the same disclaimer and license as libpng-1.2.5 with the following individual added to the list of Contributing Authors: Cosmin Truta\
libpng versions 1.0.7, July 1, 2000, through 1.2.5 - October 3, 2002, are Copyright \'a9 2000-2002 Glenn Randers-Pehrson, and are distributed according to the same disclaimer and license as libpng-1.0.6 with the following individuals added to the list of Contributing Authors: Simon-Pierre Cadieux, Eric S. Raymond, Gilles Vollant, and with the following additions to the disclaimer: There is no warranty against interference with your enjoyment of the library or against infringement.  There is no warranty that our efforts or the library will fulfill any of your particular purposes or needs.  This library is provided with all faults, and the entire risk of satisfactory quality, performance, accuracy, and effort is with the user.\
libpng versions 0.97, January 1998, through 1.0.6, March 20, 2000, are Copyright \'a9 1998, 1999 Glenn Randers-Pehrson, and are distributed according to the same disclaimer and license as libpng-0.96, with the following individuals added to the list of Contributing Authors: Tom Lane, Glenn Randers-Pehrson, Willem van Schaik\
libpng versions 0.89, June 1996, through 0.96, May 1997, are Copyright \'a9 1996, 1997 Andreas Dilger. Distributed according to the same disclaimer and license as libpng-0.88, with the following individuals added to the list of Contributing Authors: John Bowler, Kevin Bracey, Sam Bushell, Magnus Holmgren, Greg Roelofs, Tom Tanner\
libpng versions 0.5, May 1995, through 0.88, January 1996, are Copyright \'a9 1995, 1996 Guy Eric Schalnat, Group 42, Inc. For the purposes of this copyright and license, "Contributing Authors" is defined as the following set of individuals: Andreas Dilger, Dave Martindale, Guy Eric Schalnat, Paul Schmidt, Tim Wegner\
The PNG Reference Library is supplied "AS IS".  The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc. disclaim all warranties, expressed or implied, including, without limitation, the warranties of merchantability and of fitness for any purpose.  The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc. assume no liability for direct, indirect, incidental, special, exemplary, or consequential damages, which may result from the use of the PNG Reference Library, even if advised of the possibility of such damage.\
Permission is hereby granted to use, copy, modify, and distribute this source code, or portions hereof, for any purpose, without fee, subject to the following restrictions:\
1. The origin of this source code must not be misrepresented.\
2. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such and must not be misrepresented as being the original source.\
3. This Copyright notice may not be removed or altered from any source or altered source distribution.\
The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc. specifically permit, without fee, and encourage the use of this source code as a component to supporting the PNG file format in commercial products.  If you use this source code in a product, acknowledgment is not required but would be appreciated.\
A "png_get_copyright" function is available, for convenient use in "about" boxes and the like:  printf("%s",png_get_copyright(NULL));\
Also, the PNG logo (in PNG format, of course) is supplied in the files "pngbar.png" and "pngbar.jpg (88x31) and "pngnow.png" (98x31). Libpng is OSI Certified Open Source Software.  OSI Certified Open Source is a certification mark of the Open Source Initiative.\
Glenn Randers-Pehrson glennrp at users.sourceforge.net	July 11, 2012
\b\fs20 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs24 \cf0 \
Nikolaj Schlej ( UEFITool )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2015, Nikolaj Schlej  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
Schlumberger Network Solutions ( PKCS-11 libraries )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2002 Schlumberger Network Solutions <http://www.slb.com/sns> All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement:  This product includes software developed by:  Schlumberger Network Solutions <http://www.slb.com/sns>  4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
\

\b Julian R. Seward ( bzip2 )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1996-2002 Julian R Seward.  All rights reserved. Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not claim that you wrote the original software.  If you use this software in a product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be appreciated but is not required.  3. Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be misrepresented as being the original software.  4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.  \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Julian Seward, Cambridge, UK.\
jseward@acm.org\
bzip2/libbzip2 version 1.0.2 of 30 December 2001\

\b \
Wolfgang Solfrank, TooLs GmbH, et al. ( msdosfs )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1994, 1995, 1997 Wolfgang Solfrank. Copyright \'a9 1994, 1995, 1997 TooLs GmbH. All rights reserved.\
Original code by Paul Popelka (paulp@uts.amdahl.com) (see below).\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by TooLs GmbH.\
4. The name of TooLs GmbH may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY TOOLS GMBH ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL TOOLS GMBH BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF  ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Written by Paul Popelka (paulp@uts.amdahl.com)\
You can do anything you want with this software, just don't say you wrote it, and don't remove this notice.\
This software is provided "as is".\
The author supplies this software to be publicly redistributed on the understanding that the author is not responsible for the correct functioning of this software in any circumstances and is not liable for any damages caused by this software.\
Copyright \'a9 1994 Christopher G. Demetriou. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by Christopher G. Demetriou.\
4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF\'a0THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Sony Computer Entertainment ( Collada DOM, OpenSteer )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Collada DOM:  Copyright \'a9 2006 Sony Computer Entertainment Inc.\
Licensed under the MIT Open Source License, for details please see license.txt or the website http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php\
OpenSteer -- Steering Behaviors for Autonomous Characters:  Copyright \'a9 2002-2003, Sony Computer Entertainment America\
Original author: Craig Reynolds <craig_reynolds@playstation.sony.com>\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Dimitrios Souflis ( Tiny Scheme )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2000, Dimitrios Souflis.  Portions Copyright \'a9 2007-2008, Apple Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of Dimitrios Souflis nor the names of the contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\'a0\

\b Henry Spencer ( regular expressions )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1998, 1999 Henry Spencer. All rights reserved.\
Development of this software was funded, in part, by Cray Research Inc., UUNET Communications Services Inc., Sun Microsystems Inc., and Scriptics Corporation, none of whom are responsible for the results.  The author thanks all of them.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms -- with or without modification -- are permitted for any purpose, provided that redistributions in source form retain this entire copyright notice and indicate the origin and nature of any modifications.  I'd appreciate being given credit for this package in the documentation of software which uses it, but that is not a requirement.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITYAND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL HENRY SPENCER BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Spotify AB ( Annoy )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2013 Spotify AB\
Apache License Version 2.0, January 2004 http://www.apache.org/licenses/ [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]\
\

\b Tom St Denis ( LibTomCrypt )
\b0 \
LibTomCrypt, modular cryptographic library -- Tom St Denis\
LibTomCrypt is a library that provides various cryptographic algorithms in a highly modular and flexible manner. The library is free for all purposes without any express guarantee it works. \
Tom St Denis, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:tomstdenis@gmail.com"}}{\fldrslt \ul \ulc10 tomstdenis@gmail.com}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://libtom.org"}}{\fldrslt \ul http://libtom.org}}
\b \
\
The Stanford SRP Authentication Project ( SRP )
\b0 \
SRP is royalty-free worldwide for commercial and non-commercial use. The SRP library has been carefully written not to depend on any encumbered algorithms, and it is distributed under a standard BSD-style Open Source license which is shown below.  This license covers implementations based on the SRP library as well as independent implementations based on RFC 2945.\
The SRP distribution itself contains algorithms and code from various freeware packages; these parts fall under both the SRP Open Source license and the packages' own licenses.  Care has been taken to ensure that these licenses are compatible with Open Source distribution, but it is the responsibility of the\
licensee to comply with the terms of these licenses.  This disclaimer also applies to third-party libraries that may be linked into the distribution, since they may contain patented intellectual property.  The file "Copyrights" contains a list of the copyrights incorporated by portions of the software.\
Broader use of the SRP authentication technology, such as variants incorporating the use of an explicit server secret (SRP-Z), may require a license; please contact the Stanford Office of Technology Licensing (http://otl.stanford.edu/) for more information about terms and conditions.\
This software is covered under the following copyright:\
Copyright \'a9 1997-2007  The Stanford SRP Authentication Project. All Rights Reserved.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. IN NO EVENT SHALL STANFORD BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
Redistributions in source or binary form must retain an intact copy of this copyright notice.\
Address all questions regarding this license to:\
Tom Wu\
tjw@cs.Stanford.EDU
\b \
\
Stanford University Database Group ( Stanford University's STREAM Data Manager )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2004, Stanford University Database Group. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are  permitted provided that the following conditions are met: \
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  \
* Neither the name of the Stanford University nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
\
Greg Stein ( Apache mod_dav )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1998-1999 Greg Stein. All rights reserved. \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgment: This product includes software developed by Greg Stein <gstein@lyra.org> for use in the mod_dav module for Apache (http://www.webdav.org/mod_dav/). 4. Products derived from this software may not be called mod_dav nor may mod_dav appear in their names without prior written permission of Greg Stein. For written permission, please contact gstein@lyra.org. 5. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following acknowledgment: This product includes software developed by Greg Stein <gstein@lyra.org> for use in the mod_dav module for Apache (http://www.webdav.org/mod_dav/).\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY GREG STEIN ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL GREG STEIN OR THE SOFTWARE'S CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Daniel Stenberg ( curl )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1996-2007 Daniel Stenberg, <daniel@haxx.se>.  All rights reserved.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of the copyright holder shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization of the copyright holder.\
\

\b Troy Stephens et al. ( IconFamily )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2001-2006 by Troy Stephens, Thomas Schnitzer, David Remahl, Nathan Day, Ben Haller, Sven Janssen, Peter Hosey, Conor Dearden, and Elliot Glaysher\
The IconFamily source code is released under The MIT License, which permits commercial as well as non-commercial use.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.  \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 STI Pub Companies ( STIX Fonts Project )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001-2010 by the STI Pub Companies, consisting of the American Institute of Physics, the American Chemical Society, the American Mathematical Society, the American Physical Society, Elsevier, Inc., and The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc. (www.stixfonts.org), with Reserved Font Name STIX Fonts, STIX Fonts (TM) is a  trademark of The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.      \
Portions copyright \'a9 1998-2003 by MicroPress, Inc. (www.micropress-inc.com), with Reserved Font Name TM Math. To obtain additional mathematical fonts, please contact MicroPress, Inc., 68-30 Harrow Street, Forest Hills, NY 11375, USA, Phone: (718) 575-1816. \
Portions copyright \'a9 1990 by Elsevier, Inc. \
This Font Software is licensed under the SIL Open Font License, Version 1.1. \
This license is copied below, and is also available with a FAQ at:  http://scripts.sil.org/OFL \
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- \
SIL OPEN FONT LICENSE Version 1.1 - 26 February 2007 \
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- \
PREAMBLE \
The goals of the Open Font License (OFL) are to stimulate worldwide development of collaborative font projects, to support the font creation efforts of academic and linguistic communities, and to provide a free and open framework in which fonts may be shared and improved in partnership with others. \
The OFL allows the licensed fonts to be used, studied, modified and redistributed freely as long as they are not sold by themselves. The fonts, including any derivative works, can be bundled, embedded, redistributed and/or sold with any software provided that any reserved names are not used by derivative works. The fonts and derivatives, however, cannot be released under any other type of license. The requirement for fonts to remain under this license does not apply to any document created using the fonts or their derivatives. \
DEFINITIONS \
"Font Software" refers to the set of files released by the Copyright Holder(s) under this license and clearly marked as such. This may include source files, build scripts and documentation. \
"Reserved Font Name" refers to any names specified as such after the copyright statement(s). \
"Original Version" refers to the collection of Font Software components as distributed by the Copyright Holder(s). \
"Modified Version" refers to any derivative made by adding to, deleting, or substituting -- in part or in whole -- any of the components of the Original Version, by changing formats or by porting the Font Software to a new environment. \
"Author" refers to any designer, engineer, programmer, technical writer or other person who contributed to the Font Software.\
PERMISSION & CONDITIONS \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of the Font Software, to use, study, copy, merge, embed, modify, redistribute, and sell modified and unmodified copies of the Font Software, subject to the following conditions: \
1) Neither the Font Software nor any of its individual components, in Original or Modified Versions, may be sold by itself. \
2) Original or Modified Versions of the Font Software may be bundled, redistributed and/or sold with any software, provided that each copy contains the above copyright notice and this license. These can be included either as stand-alone text files, human-readable headers or in the appropriate machine-readable metadata fields within text or binary files as long as those fields can be easily viewed by the user. \
3) No Modified Version of the Font Software may use the Reserved Font Name(s) unless explicit written permission is granted by the corresponding Copyright Holder. This restriction only applies to the primary font name as presented to the users. \
4) The name(s) of the Copyright Holder(s) or the Author(s) of the Font Software shall not be used to promote, endorse or advertise any Modified Version, except to acknowledge the contribution(s) of the Copyright Holder(s) and the Author(s) or with their explicit written permission. \
5) The Font Software, modified or unmodified, in part or in whole, must be distributed entirely under this license, and must not be distributed under any other license. The requirement for fonts to remain under this license does not apply to any document created using the Font Software. \
TERMINATION \
This license becomes null and void if any of the above conditions are not met. \
DISCLAIMER \
THE FONT SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT, PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR OTHER RIGHT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE FONT SOFTWARE OR FROM OTHER DEALINGS IN THE FONT SOFTWARE.\
\

\b AB Strakt, Jean-Paul Calderone ( pyOpenSSL )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001, 2008-2010, AB Strakt, Jean-Paul Calderone \
Apache License Version 2.0, January 2004 http://www.apache.org/licenses/ 
\fs20 [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]
\fs24 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Sun Microsystems ( fdlibm )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1993, 2004 by Sun Microsystems, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Developed at SunSoft, a Sun Microsystems, Inc. business.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software is freely granted, provided that this notice is preserved.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Sun Microsystems ( Open Solaris autofs, DTrace, plockstat)
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006 Sun Microsystems, Inc. (plockstat)\
Copyright \'a9 1988-2006 Sun Microsystems, Inc. (Open Solaris autofs)\
Copyright \'a9 1998-2005 Sun Microsystems, Inc. (DTrace)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 COMMON DEVELOPMENT AND DISTRIBUTION LICENSE (CDDL)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Version 1.0\
1. Definitions.\
    1.1. "Contributor" means each individual or entity that creates or contributes to the creation of Modifications.\
    1.2. "Contributor Version" means the combination of the Original Software, prior Modifications used by a Contributor (if any), and the Modifications made by that particular Contributor.\
    1.3. "Covered Software" means (a) the Original Software, or (b) Modifications, or \'a9 the combination of files containing Original Software with files containing Modifications, in each case including portions thereof.   \
    1.4. "Executable" means the Covered Software in any form other than Source Code.\
    1.5. "Initial Developer" means the individual or entity that first makes Original Software available under this License.\
    1.6. "Larger Work" means a work which combines Covered Software or portions thereof with code not governed by the terms of this License.\
    1.7. "License" means this document.\
    1.8. "Licensable" means having the right to grant, to the maximum extent possible, whether at the time of the initial grant or subsequently acquired, any and all of the rights conveyed herein.\
    1.9. "Modifications" means the Source Code and Executable form of any of the following:\
        A. Any file that results from an addition to, deletion from or modification of the contents of a file containing Original Software or previous Modifications;\
        B. Any new file that contains any part of the Original Software or previous Modification; or\
        C. Any new file that is contributed or otherwise made available under the terms of this License.\
    1.10. "Original Software" means the Source Code and Executable form of computer software code that is originally released under this License.\
    1.11. "Patent Claims" means any patent claim(s), now owned or hereafter acquired, including without limitation, method, process, and apparatus claims, in any patent Licensable by grantor.\
    1.12. "Source Code" means (a) the common form of computer software code in which modifications are made and (b) associated documentation included in or with such code.\
    1.13. "You" (or "Your") means an individual or a legal entity exercising rights under, and complying with all of the terms of, this License. For legal entities, "You" includes any entity which controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with You. For purposes of this definition, "control" means (a) the power, direct or indirect, to cause the direction or management of such entity, whether by contract or otherwise, or (b) ownership of more than fifty percent (50%) of the outstanding shares or beneficial ownership of such entity.\
2. License Grants\
    2.1. The Initial Developer Grant.\
    Conditioned upon Your compliance with Section 3.1 below and subject to third party intellectual property claims, the Initial Developer hereby grants You a world-wide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license:\
        (a) under intellectual property rights (other than patent or trademark) Licensable by Initial Developer, to use, reproduce, modify, display, perform, sublicense and distribute the Original Software (or portions thereof), with or without Modifications, and/or as part of a Larger Work; and\
        (b) under Patent Claims infringed by the making, using or selling of Original Software, to make, have made, use, practice, sell, and offer for sale, and/or otherwise dispose of the Original Software (or portions thereof).\
        \'a9 The licenses granted in Sections 2.1(a) and (b) are effective on the date Initial Developer first distributes or otherwise makes the Original Software available to a third party under the terms of this License.\
        (d) Notwithstanding Section 2.1(b) above, no patent license is granted: (1) for code that You delete from the Original Software, or (2) for infringements caused by: (i) the modification of the Original Software, or (ii) the combination of the Original Software with other software or devices.\
    2.2. Contributor Grant.\
    Conditioned upon Your compliance with Section 3.1 below and subject to third party intellectual property claims, each Contributor hereby grants You a world-wide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license:\
        (a) under intellectual property rights (other than patent or trademark) Licensable by Contributor to use, reproduce, modify, display, perform, sublicense and distribute the Modifications created by such Contributor (or portions thereof), either on an unmodified basis, with other Modifications, as Covered Software and/or as part of a Larger Work; and\
        (b) under Patent Claims infringed by the making, using, or selling of Modifications made by that Contributor either alone and/or in combination with its Contributor Version (or portions of such combination), to make, use, sell, offer for sale, have made, and/or otherwise dispose of: (1) Modifications made by that Contributor (or portions thereof); and (2) the combination of Modifications made by that Contributor with its Contributor Version (or portions of such combination).\
        \'a9 The licenses granted in Sections 2.2(a) and 2.2(b) are effective on the date Contributor first distributes or otherwise makes the Modifications available to a third party.\
        (d) Notwithstanding Section 2.2(b) above, no patent license is granted: (1) for any code that Contributor has deleted from the Contributor Version; (2) for infringements caused by: (i) third party modifications of Contributor Version, or (ii) the combination of Modifications made by that Contributor with other software (except as part of the Contributor Version) or other devices; or (3) under Patent Claims infringed by Covered Software in the absence of Modifications made by that Contributor.\
3. Distribution Obligations.\
    3.1. Availability of Source Code.\
    Any Covered Software that You distribute or otherwise make available in Executable form must also be made available in Source Code form and that Source Code form must be distributed only under the terms of this License. You must include a copy of this License with every copy of the Source Code form of the Covered Software You distribute or otherwise make available. You must inform recipients of any such Covered Software in Executable form as to how they can obtain such Covered Software in Source Code form in a reasonable manner on or through a medium customarily used for software exchange.\
    3.2. Modifications.\
    The Modifications that You create or to which You contribute are governed by the terms of this License. You represent that You believe Your Modifications are Your original creation(s) and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights conveyed by this License.\
    3.3. Required Notices.\
    You must include a notice in each of Your Modifications that identifies You as the Contributor of the Modification. You may not remove or alter any copyright, patent or trademark notices contained within the Covered Software, or any notices of licensing or any descriptive text giving attribution to any Contributor or the Initial Developer.\
    3.4. Application of Additional Terms.\
    You may not offer or impose any terms on any Covered Software in Source Code form that alters or restricts the applicable version of this License or the recipients" rights hereunder. You may choose to offer, and to charge a fee for, warranty, support, indemnity or liability obligations to one or more recipients of Covered Software. However, you may do so only on Your own behalf, and not on behalf of the Initial Developer or any Contributor. You must make it absolutely clear that any such warranty, support, indemnity or liability obligation is offered by You alone, and You hereby agree to indemnify the Initial Developer and every Contributor for any liability incurred by the Initial Developer or such Contributor as a result of warranty, support, indemnity or liability terms You offer.\
    3.5. Distribution of Executable Versions.\
    You may distribute the Executable form of the Covered Software under the terms of this License or under the terms of a license of Your choice, which may contain terms different from this License, provided that You are in compliance with the terms of this License and that the license for the Executable form does not attempt to limit or alter the recipient"s rights in the Source Code form from the rights set forth in this License. If You distribute the Covered Software in Executable form under a different license, You must make it absolutely clear that any terms which differ from this License are offered by You alone, not by the Initial Developer or Contributor. You hereby agree to indemnify the Initial Developer and every Contributor for any liability incurred by the Initial Developer or such Contributor as a result of any such terms You offer.\
    3.6. Larger Works.\
    You may create a Larger Work by combining Covered Software with other code not governed by the terms of this License and distribute the Larger Work as a single product. In such a case, You must make sure the requirements of this License are fulfilled for the Covered Software.\
4. Versions of the License.\
    4.1. New Versions.\
    Sun Microsystems, Inc. is the initial license steward and may publish revised and/or new versions of this License from time to time. Each version will be given a distinguishing version number. Except as provided in Section 4.3, no one other than the license steward has the right to modify this License.\
    4.2. Effect of New Versions.\
    You may always continue to use, distribute or otherwise make the Covered Software available under the terms of the version of the License under which You originally received the Covered Software. If the Initial Developer includes a notice in the Original Software prohibiting it from being distributed or otherwise made available under any subsequent version of the License, You must distribute and make the Covered Software available under the terms of the version of the License under which You originally received the Covered Software. Otherwise, You may also choose to use, distribute or otherwise make the Covered Software available under the terms of any subsequent version of the License published by the license steward.\
    4.3. Modified Versions.\
    When You are an Initial Developer and You want to create a new license for Your Original Software, You may create and use a modified version of this License if You: (a) rename the license and remove any references to the name of the license steward (except to note that the license differs from this License); and (b) otherwise make it clear that the license contains terms which differ from this License.\
5. DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY.\
COVERED SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED UNDER THIS LICENSE ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES THAT THE COVERED SOFTWARE IS FREE OF DEFECTS, MERCHANTABLE, FIT FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGING. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE COVERED SOFTWARE IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD ANY COVERED SOFTWARE PROVE DEFECTIVE IN ANY RESPECT, YOU (NOT THE INITIAL DEVELOPER OR ANY OTHER CONTRIBUTOR) ASSUME THE COST OF ANY NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION. THIS DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY CONSTITUTES AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THIS LICENSE. NO USE OF ANY COVERED SOFTWARE IS AUTHORIZED HEREUNDER EXCEPT UNDER THIS DISCLAIMER.\
6. TERMINATION.\
    6.1. This License and the rights granted hereunder will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with terms herein and fail to cure such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. Provisions which, by their nature, must remain in effect beyond the termination of this License shall survive. \
    6.2. If You assert a patent infringement claim (excluding declaratory judgment actions) against Initial Developer or a Contributor (the Initial Developer or Contributor against whom You assert such claim is referred to as "Participant") alleging that the Participant Software (meaning the Contributor Version where the Participant is a Contributor or the Original Software where the Participant is the Initial Developer) directly or indirectly infringes any patent, then any and all rights granted directly or indirectly to You by such Participant, the Initial Developer (if the Initial Developer is not the Participant) and all Contributors under Sections 2.1 and/or 2.2 of this License shall, upon 60 days notice from Participant terminate prospectively and automatically at the expiration of such 60 day notice period, unless if within such 60 day period You withdraw Your claim with respect to the Participant Software against such Participant either unilaterally or pursuant to a written agreement with Participant.\
    6.3. If You assert a patent infringement claim against Participant alleging that the Participant Software directly or indirectly infringes any patent where such claim is resolved (such as by license or settlement) prior to the initiation of patent infringement litigation, then the reasonable value of the licenses granted by such Participant under Sections 2.1 or 2.2 shall be taken into account in determining the amount or value of any payment or license.\
   6.4. In the event of termination under Sections 6.1 or 6.2 above, all end user licenses that have been validly granted  by You or any distributor hereunder prior to termination (excluding licenses granted to You by any distributor) shall survive termination.\
7. LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.\
UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES AND UNDER NO LEGAL THEORY, WHETHER TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE), CONTRACT, OR OTHERWISE, SHALL YOU, THE INITIAL DEVELOPER, ANY OTHER CONTRIBUTOR, OR ANY DISTRIBUTOR OF COVERED SOFTWARE, OR ANY SUPPLIER OF ANY OF SUCH PARTIES, BE LIABLE TO ANY PERSON FOR ANY INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY CHARACTER INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, DAMAGES FOR LOSS OF GOODWILL, WORK STOPPAGE, COMPUTER FAILURE OR MALFUNCTION, OR ANY AND ALL OTHER COMMERCIAL DAMAGES OR LOSSES, EVEN IF SUCH PARTY SHALL HAVE BEEN INFORMED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. THIS LIMITATION OF LIABILITY SHALL NOT APPLY TO LIABILITY FOR DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURY RESULTING FROM SUCH PARTY"S NEGLIGENCE TO THE EXTENT APPLICABLE LAW PROHIBITS SUCH LIMITATION. SOME JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW THE EXCLUSION OR LIMITATION OF INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, SO THIS EXCLUSION AND LIMITATION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.\
8. U.S. GOVERNMENT END USERS.\
The Covered Software is a "commercial item," as that term is defined in 48 C.F.R. 2.101 (Oct. 1995), consisting of\
"commercial computer software" (as that term is defined at 48 C.F.R. " 252.227-7014(a)(1)) and "commercial computer software documentation" as such terms are used in 48 C.F.R. 12.212 Sept. 1995). Consistent with 48 C.F.R. 12.212 and 48 C.F.R. 227.7202-1 through 227.7202-4 (June 1995),\
all U.S. Government End Users acquire Covered Software with only those rights set forth herein. This U.S. Government Rights clause is in lieu of, and supersedes, any other FAR, DFAR, or other clause or provision that addresses Government rights in computer software under this License.\
9. MISCELLANEOUS.\
This License represents the complete agreement concerning subject matter hereof. If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to the extent necessary to make it enforceable. This License shall be governed by the law of the jurisdiction specified in a notice contained within the Original Software (except to the extent applicable law, if any, provides otherwise), excluding such jurisdiction"s conflict-of-law provisions. Any litigation relating to this License shall be subject  to the jurisdiction of the courts located in the jurisdiction and venue specified in a notice contained within the Original Software, with the losing party responsible for costs, including, without limitation, court costs and reasonable attorneys" fees and expenses. The application of the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods is expressly excluded. Any law or regulation which provides that the language of a contract shall be construed against the drafter shall not apply to this License. You agree that You alone are responsible for compliance with the United States export administration regulations (and the export control laws and regulation of any other countries) when You use, distribute or otherwise make available any Covered Software.\
10. RESPONSIBILITY FOR CLAIMS.\
As between Initial Developer and the Contributors, each party is responsible for claims and damages arising, directly or indirectly, out of its utilization of rights under this License and You agree to work with Initial Developer and Contributors to distribute such responsibility on an equitable basis. Nothing herein is intended or shall be deemed to constitute any admission of liability. \
--------\
NOTICE PURSUANT TO SECTION 9 OF THE COMMON DEVELOPMENT AND DISTRIBUTION LICENSE (CDDL)\
The OpenSolaris code released under the CDDL shall be governed by the laws of the State of California (excluding conflict-of-law provisions). Any litigation relating to this License shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Courts of the Northern District of California and the state courts of the State of California, with venue lying in Santa Clara County, California.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Sun Microsystems ( Sun RPC )
\b0 \
Sun RPC is a product of Sun Microsystems, Inc. and is provided for unrestricted use provided that this legend is included on all tape media and as a part of the software program in whole or part.  Users may copy or modify Sun RPC without charge, but are not authorized to license or distribute it to anyone else except as part of a product or program developed by the user or with the express written consent of Sun Microsystems, Inc. Sun RPC is provided with no support and without any obligation on the part of Sun Microsystems, Inc. to assist in its use, correction, modification or enhancement.\
SUN RPC IS PROVIDED AS IS WITH NO WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND INCLUDING THE WARRANTIES OF DESIGN, MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR ARISING FROM A COURSE OF DEALING, USAGE OR TRADE PRACTICE. SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC. SHALL HAVE NO LIABILITY WITH RESPECT TO THE INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHTS, TRADE SECRETS OR ANY PATENTS BY SUN RPC OR ANY PART THEREOF.\
In no event will Sun Microsystems, Inc. be liable for any lost revenue or profits or other special, indirect and consequential damages, even if Sun has been advised of the possibility of such damages. Sun Microsystems, Inc. 2550 Garcia Avenue Mountain View, California  94043.\
\

\b Swinburne University of Technology ( CAIA Modular Congestion Control )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2008 Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia. All rights reserved.\
This software was developed at the Centre for Advanced Internet Architectures, Swinburne University, by Lawrence Stewart and James Healy, made possible in part by a grant from the Cisco University Research Program Fund at Community Foundation Silicon Valley.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the\'a0documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
\
Tamachi Phonetic Kanji Alphabet Development Team ( Tamachi phonetic kanji alphabet )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006, Tamachi Phonetic Kanji Alphabet Development Team. All rights reserved.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
\b \
\
The University of Reading ( Adept )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2012-2015 The University of Reading\
Author: Robin Hogan <r.j.hogan@reading.ac.uk>\
This file is part of the Adept library.\
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License\'94); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.\
Adept is dual-licensed, which means that you may choose to be bound by either of the following licenses.\
The Apache License, Version 2.0. This is a permissive, free-software license that will be the choice for almost all users. It permits you to use and modify the library for any purpose, and to redistribute it under the same terms. Modified versions, or derivative works incorporating Adept, may be distributed in source or object form with a few restrictions that are stated in the license, but provided these conditions are met it may be incorporated into proprietary software.\
The ESA Software Community License (ESCL), Type 1. Recognising that Adept was written largely with funding from the European Space Agency, you may alternatively use the Type-1 ESCL. It is more restrictive than Apache 2.0 in that derivative works can only be released under the same license, and the license is limited to users in ESA's Member States. The latter condition means that it is not an open-source license. There are several versions of the Type-1 ESCL in circulation; you may use any official version sanctioned by ESA.\
In addition to choosing only one of the two licenses above, you are permitted to dual-license your own derivative work using the same two licenses, if you prefer.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
Christoph Wimberger ( CTFuzzySearch )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The MIT License (MIT)\
Copyright \'a9 2014 Christoph Wimberger\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
Zilong Tan ( fast-hash )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The MIT License\
Copyright \'a9 2012 Zilong Tan (eric.zltan@gmail.com)\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
Thai Open Source Software Center Ltd, Clark Cooper et al. ( expat )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1998, 1999, 2000 Thai Open Source Software Center Ltd and Clark Cooper.  Copyright \'a9 2001, 2002, 2003 Expat maintainers.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the Software), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\

\b \
Tilde Inc., et al. ( Ember.js )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2011-2014 Tilde Inc. and contributors Portions Copyright 2006-2011 Strobe Inc. Portions Copyright 2008-2011 Apple Inc. All rights reserved. Copyright \'a9 2014 Yehuda Katz, Tom Dale and Ember.js contributors Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\

\b \
Andrew Tridgell, et al.
\b0  
\b ( rsync )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1992-1998 Andrew Tridgell, et al. All rights reserved.\
The rsync software is free software and is licensed under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL) as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the rsync software under the terms of GPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple. The rsync software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GPL for more details; a copy of the GPL is included with this product.  
\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU GPL Version 2, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]
\fs24 \
\

\b ( tr-spell )
\b0 \
Apache License Version 2.0, January 2004 http://www.apache.org/licenses/ 
\fs20 [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]
\fs24 \
\

\b The TrustedBSD Project ( OpenBSM )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1991-2008. Various copyright holders including The Regents of the University of California; Todd C. Miller; Robert N. M. Watson; Thomas Moestl; Apple Inc.; SPARTA, Inc.; Martin Voros, et al.\
OpenBSM Copyrights and Licensing\
OpenBSM is covered by a number of copyrights, with licenses being either two or three clause BSD licenses.  Individual file headers should be consulted for specific copyrights on specific components.  The TrustedBSD Project would appreciate the contribution of fixes and enhancements under identical or substantially similar licenses:\
Copyright \'a9 <year> <copyright holder>  All rights reserved. <any additional comments or credits>\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Theodore Ts'o ( libuuid )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1996, 1997 Theodore Ts'o.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, and the entire permission notice in its entirety, including the disclaimer of warranties.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, ALL OF WHICH ARE HEREBY DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\fs20 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Tatsuhiro Tsujikawa ( nghttp2 )
\b0 \
The MIT License\
Copyright \'a9 2012, 2014, 2015, 2016 Tatsuhiro Tsujikawa\
Copyright \'a9 2012, 2014, 2015, 2016 nghttp2 contributors\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Tatsuhiro Tsujikawa ( Spdylay )
\b0 \
The MIT License\
Copyright \'a9 2012 Tatsuhiro Tsujikawa \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b \cf0 David Turner, Robert Wilhelm, and Werner Lemberg ( FreeType )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1996-2002, 2006, David Turner, Robert Wilhelm, and Werner Lemberg \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\fs20 \cf0 The FreeType Project LICENSE\
----------------------------\
2006-Jan-27\
Copyright 1996-2002, 2006 by David Turner, Robert Wilhelm, and Werner Lemberg\
Introduction\
============\
The FreeType Project is distributed in several archive packages; some of them may contain, in addition to the FreeType font engine, various tools and contributions which rely on, or relate to, the FreeType Project.\
This  license applies to all files found in such packages, and which do not fall under their own explicit license. The license affects thus the FreeType font engine, the test programs, documentation and makefiles, at the very least.\
This  license was inspired by the BSD, Artistic, and IJG (Independent JPEG Group) licenses, which all encourage inclusion and use of free software in commercial and freeware products alike. As a consequence, its main points are that:\
o We don't promise that this software works. However, we will be interested in any kind of bug reports. ('as is' distribution)\
o You can use this software for whatever you want, in parts or full form, without having to pay us. ('royalty-free' usage)\
o You may not pretend that you wrote this software.  If you use it, or only parts of it, in a program, you must acknowledge somewhere in your documentation that you have used the FreeType code. ('credits')\
We specifically permit and encourage the inclusion of this software, with or without modifications, in commercial products. We disclaim all warranties covering The FreeType Project and assume no liability related to The FreeType Project.\
Finally, many people asked us for a preferred form for a credit/disclaimer to use in compliance with this license.  We thus encourage you to use the following text:\
"""\
Portions of this software are copyright \'a9 <year> The FreeType Project (www.freetype.org).  All rights reserved.\
"""\
Please replace <year> with the value from the FreeType version you actually use.\
Legal Terms\
===========\
0. Definitions\
--------------\
Throughout this license, the terms 'package','FreeType Project', and 'FreeType archive' refer to the set of files originally distributed by the authors (David Turner, Robert Wilhelm, and Werner Lemberg) as the 'FreeType Project', be they named as alpha, beta or final release.\
'You' refers to the licensee, or person using the project, where 'using' is a generic term including compiling the project's source code as well as linking it to form a 'program' or 'executable'. This program is referred to as 'a program using the FreeType engine'.\
This license applies to all files distributed in the original FreeType Project, including all source code, binaries and documentation, unless otherwise stated in the file in its original, unmodified form as distributed in the original archive. If you are unsure whether or not a particulars file is covered by this license, you must contact us to verify this.\
The FreeType Project is copyright \'a9 1996-2000 by David Turner, Robert Wilhelm, and Werner Lemberg.  All rights reserved except as specified below.\
1. No Warranty\
--------------\
THE FREETYPE PROJECT IS PROVIDED 'AS IS' WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. IN NO EVENT WILL ANY OF THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES CAUSED BY THE USE OR THE INABILITY TO USE, OF THE FREETYPE PROJECT.\
2. Redistribution\
-----------------\
This license grants a worldwide, royalty-free, perpetual and irrevocable right and license to use, execute, perform, compile, display, copy, create derivative works of, distribute and sublicense the FreeType Project (in both source and object code forms) and derivative works thereof  for any purpose; and to authorize others to exercise some or all of the rights granted herein, subject to the following conditions:\
o Redistribution of source code must retain this license file ('FTL.TXT') unaltered; any additions, deletions or changes to the original files must be clearly indicated in accompanying documentation. The copyright notices of the unaltered, original files must be preserved in all copies of  source files.\
o Redistribution in binary form must provide a disclaimer that states that the software is based in part of the work of the FreeType Team, in the distribution documentation. We also encourage you to put an URL to the FreeType web page in your documentation, though this isn't mandatory. \
These conditions apply to any software derived from or based on the FreeType Project, not just the unmodified files. If you use our work, you must acknowledge us. However, no fee need be paid to us.\
3. Advertising\
--------------\
Neither the FreeType authors and contributors nor you shall use the name of the other for commercial, advertising, or promotional purposes without specific prior written permission. We suggest, but do not require, that you use one or more of the following phrases to refer to this software in your documentation or advertising materials: 'FreeType Project', 'FreeType Engine', 'FreeType library', or 'FreeType Distribution'.\
As you have not signed this license, you are not required to accept it. However, as the FreeType Project is copyrighted material, only this license, or another one contracted with the authors, grants you the right to use, distribute, and modify it. Therefore, by using, distributing, or modifying the FreeType Project, you indicate that you understand and accept all the terms of this license.\
4. Contacts\
-----------\
There are two mailing lists related to FreeType: \
freetype@nongnu.org\
Discusses general use and applications of FreeType, as well as future and  wanted additions to the  library and distribution. If  you are looking  for support,  start in  this list  if you haven't found anything to help you in the documentation. \
freetype-devel@nongnu.org\
Discusses bugs,  as well  as engine internals,  design issues, specific licenses, porting, etc.\
Our home page can be found at http://www.freetype.org
\fs24 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Twisted Matrix Laboratories
\b0  
\b ( Twisted )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2001-2005 Allen Short,  Andrew Bennetts,  Apple Computer, Inc., Benjamin Bruheim, Bob Ippolito, Christopher Armstrong, Donovan Preston, Eric Mangold, Itamar Shtull-Trauring, James Knight, Jason A. Mobarak, Jonathan Lange, Jonathan D. Simms, Jp Calderone, J\'b8rgen Hermann, Kevin Turner, Mary Gardiner, Matthew Lefkowitz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Moshe Zadka, Paul Swartz, Pavel Pergamenshchik, Sean Riley, Travis B. Hartwell.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
Exception: \
Some files in twisted/python/pymodules/ are copyright Python Foundation and covered by the License contained in twisted/python/pymodules/LICENSE-python.txt.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs20 \cf0 PSF LICENSE AGREEMENT FOR PYTHON 2.3\
------------------------------------\
1. This LICENSE AGREEMENT is between the Python Software Foundation ("PSF"), and the Individual or Organization ("Licensee") accessing and otherwise using Python 2.3 software in source or binary form and its\
associated documentation.\
2. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License Agreement, PSF hereby grants Licensee a nonexclusive, royalty-free, world-wide license to reproduce, analyze, test, perform and/or display publicly, prepare derivative works, distribute, and otherwise use Python 2.3 alone or in any derivative version, provided, however, that PSF's License Agreement and PSF's notice of copyright, i.e., "Copyright \'a9 2001, 2002, 2003 Python Software Foundation; All Rights Reserved" are retained in Python 2.3 alone or in any derivative version prepared by Licensee.\
3. In the event Licensee prepares a derivative work that is based on or incorporates Python 2.3 or any part thereof, and wants to make the derivative work available to others as provided herein, then Licensee hereby agrees to include in any such work a brief summary of the changes made to Python 2.3.\
4. PSF is making Python 2.3 available to Licensee on an "AS IS" basis.  PSF MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED.  BY WAY OF EXAMPLE, BUT NOT LIMITATION, PSF MAKES NO AND DISCLAIMS ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR THAT THE USE OF PYTHON 2.3 WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY THIRD PARTY RIGHTS.\
5. PSF SHALL NOT BE LIABLE TO LICENSEE OR ANY OTHER USERS OF PYTHON 2.3 FOR ANY INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR LOSS AS A RESULT OF MODIFYING, DISTRIBUTING, OR OTHERWISE USING PYTHON 2.3, OR ANY DERIVATIVE THEREOF, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY THEREOF.\
6. This License Agreement will automatically terminate upon a material breach of its terms and conditions.\
7. Nothing in this License Agreement shall be deemed to create any relationship of agency, partnership, or joint venture between PSF and Licensee.  This License Agreement does not grant permission to use PSF trademarks or trade name in a trademark sense to endorse or promote products or services of Licensee, or any third party.\
8. By copying, installing or otherwise using Python 2.3, Licensee agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of this License Agreement.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Unicode, Inc. ( ConvertUTF )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001-2004 Unicode, Inc.  All rights reserved.\
Disclaimer:  This source code is provided as is by Unicode, Inc. No claims are made as to fitness for any particular purpose. No warranties of any kind are expressed or implied. The recipient agrees to determine applicability of information provided. If this file has been purchased on magnetic or optical media from Unicode, Inc., the sole remedy for any claim will be exchange of defective media within 90 days of receipt.\
Limitations on Rights to Redistribute This Code:  Unicode, Inc. hereby grants the right to freely use the information supplied in this file in the creation of products supporting the Unicode Standard, and to make copies of this file in any form for internal or external distribution as long as this notice remains attached.\
\

\b University Corporation for Atmospheric Research/Unidata ( wordexp(), wordfree() from LDM project )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1995-2002 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research/Unidata.\
Portions of this software were developed by the Unidata Program at the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research.\
Access and use of this software shall impose the following obligations and understandings on the user. The user is granted the right, without any fee or cost, to use, copy, modify, alter, enhance and distribute this software, and any derivative works thereof, and its supporting documentation for any purpose whatsoever, provided that this entire notice appears in all copies of the software, derivative works and supporting documentation.  Further, UCAR requests that the user credit UCAR/Unidata in any publications that result from the use of this software or in any product that includes this software. The names UCAR and/or Unidata, however, may not be used in any advertising or publicity to endorse or promote any products or commercial entity unless specific written permission is obtained from UCAR/Unidata. The user also understands that UCAR/Unidata is not obligated to provide the user with any support, consulting, training or assistance of any kind with regard to the use, operation and performance of this software nor to provide the user with any updates, revisions, new versions or "bug fixes."\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY UCAR/UNIDATA "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL UCAR/UNIDATA BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE ACCESS, USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 University of California, et. al. ( BSD Operating System )
\b0 \
This product includes software developed by the University of California, Berkeley, and its contributors.\
Copyright \'a9 1980-1997 The Regents of the University of California.\
Copyright \'a9 1994 Ugen J.S.Antsilevich.\
Copyright \'a9 1998 Apple Computer, Inc.\
Copyright \'a9 1994 The Australian National University.\
Copyright \'a9 1986 by Robert V. Baron.\
Copyright \'a9 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996 Keith Bostic.\
Copyright \'a9 1993 Daniel Boulet.\
Copyright \'a9 1992, 1993 John Brezak.\
Copyright \'a9 1996 Charles D. Cranor and Washington University.\
Copyright \'a9 1994-1996 Cronyx Engineering Ltd.\
Copyright \'a9 1988, 1989 by Adam de Boor.\
Copyright \'a9 1992,1993 Theo de Raadt <deraadt@fsa.ca>.\
Copyright \'a9 1989 Stephen Deering.\
Copyright \'a9 1994 Christopher G. Demetriou.\
Copyright \'a9 1997,1998 Julian Elischer <julian@freebsd.org>.\
Copyright \'a9 1994, Simon J. Gerraty.\
Copyright \'a9 1995 Martin Husemann.\
Copyright \'a9 1994-97 Mats O Jansson <moj@stacken.kth.se>.\
Copyright \'a9 1993 by Thomas Koenig.\
Copyright \'a9 1993 by Adrian Mariano <adrian@cam.cornell.edu>.\
Copyright \'a9 1993 Andrew Moore, Talke Studio.\
Copyright \'a9 1992 Keith Muller.\
Copyright \'a9 1996 Alex Nash.\
Copyright \'a9 1988 Julian Onions <jpo@cs.nott.ac.uk>.\
Copyright \'a9 1995 Bill Paul <wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu>.\
Copyright \'a9 1993  David Parsons.\
Copyright \'a9 1990, 1992 Jan-Simon Pendry.\
Copyright \'a9 1995-1997 by Darren Reed.\
Copyright \'a9 1998 Luigi Rizzo.\
Copyright \'a9 1994-1996 Wolfram Schneider <wosch@FreeBSD.org>, Berlin.\
Copyright \'a9 1991, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 Wolfgang Solfrank.\
Copyright \'a9 1998 Brian Somers <brian@Awfulhak.org>.\
Copyright \'a9 1989 by Berkeley Softworks.\
Copyright \'a9 1996 Ignatios Souvatzis.\
Copyright \'a9 1992 Diomidis Spinellis.\
Copyright \'a9 1997 Jonathan Stone.\
Copyright \'a9 1985 Sun Microsystems, Inc.\
Copyright \'a9 1995, 1996 Matt Thomas <matt@3am-software.com>.\
Copyright \'a9 1997 Jason R. Thorpe.\
Copyright \'a9 1991, 1994 TooLs GmbH.\
Copyright \'a9 University of British Columbia, 1984.\
Copyright \'a9 1988, 1992 The University of Utah and the Center for Software Science (CSS).\
Copyright \'a9 UNIX System Laboratories, Inc.\
Copyright \'a9 1993, 1994 Winning Strategies, Inc.\
All rights reserved.\
This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by Adam S. Moskowitz of Menlo Consulting; Adam de Boor; Asa Romberger; Atsushi Murai (amurai@spec.co.jp); Barry Brachman; Bob Toxen; Brian Hirt.; Case Larsen; Chris Newcomb; Chris Torek; Cimarron D. Taylor of the University of California, Berkeley; Darren F. Provine; Dave Taylor, of Intuitive Systems; Dave Yost; David Barto at Celerity Computer Corp.; David C. Elliott, of MIPS Computer Systems; David Goodenough; David Hitz of Auspex Systems, Inc.; Diomidis Spinellis of Imperial College, University of London; Donn Seeley at Berkeley Software Design, Inc.; Eamonn McManus of Trinity College Dublin; Ed James; Edward Sze-Tyan Wang; Edward Wang at The University of California, Berkeley; Guy Harris at Network Appliance Corp.; Henry Spencer of the University of Toronto; Herb Hasler and Rick Macklem at The University of Guelph; James A. Woods; James W. Williams of the University of Maryland and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center; Jan-Simon Pendry; Jef Poskanzer and Craig Leres of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory; Jerry Berkman; Jim Gillogly at The Rand Corporation; Jim R. Oldroyd at The Instruction Set and Keith Gabryelski at Commodore Business Machines; John B. Roll Jr.; Joseph Orost; Keith Muller of the University of California, San Diego and Lance Visser of Convex Computer Corporation; Ken Arnold; Ken Smith of The State University of New York at Buffalo; Kenneth Almquist; Kevin Fall; Kevin Ruddy; Kim Letkeman; Landon Curt Noll; Marciano Pitargue; Michael Fischbein; Michael Rendell of the Memorial University of Newfoundland; Michiro Hikida; Mike Hibler; Mike Muuss; Mike Olson; Muffy Barkocy; Ozan Yigit at York University; Pace Willisson (pace@blitz.com); Ralph Campbell; Rich $alz of BBN Inc.; Rick Adams; Rick Macklem at The University of Guelph; Robert Corbett; Robert Elz at The University of Melbourne; Robert Paul Corbett; Spencer Thomas; Stephen Deering of Stanford University; Steve Hayman of the Indiana University Computer Science Department; Sun Microsystems, Inc.; Symmetric Computer Systems; Timothy C. Stoehr; Tony Nardo of the Johns Hopkins University/Applied Physics Lab; and the Systems Programming Group of the University of Utah Computer Science Department; the UCLA Ficus project; the Laboratory for Computation Vision and the Computer Science Department of the the University of British Columbia and the Computer Science Department (IV) of the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany; Scooter Morris at Genentech Inc.; Chuck Karish of Mindcraft, Inc.; Mike Karels at Berkeley Software Design, Inc.\
The United States Government has rights in parts of this work pursuant to contract no. DE-AC03-76SF00098 between the United States Department of Energy and the University of California.\
Some code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by the Center for Software Science of the University of Utah Computer Science Department.  CSS requests users of this software to return to css-dist@cs.utah.edu any improvements that they make and grant CSS redistribution rights.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by the University of California, Berkeley and its contributors. 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b University of California ( Cubic TCP )
\b0 \
Copyright Owner: Copyright \'a9 1991-1997 Regents of the University of California. Copyright Publication Years: 1991-1997 Copyright \'a9 1991-1997 Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved. \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by the Computer Systems Engineering Group at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. 4. Neither the name of the University nor of the Laboratory may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. \
\

\b University of California, through Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (subject to receipt of any required approvals from the U.S. Dept. of Energy) ( lperf3 )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2009-2014, The Regents of the University of California, through Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (subject to receipt of any required approvals from the U.S. Dept. of Energy). All rights reserved. \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: \
	(1) Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
	(2) Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/ or other materials provided with the distribution. \
	(3) Neither the name of the University of California, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, U.S. Dept. of Energy nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. You are under no obligation whatsoever to provide any bug fixes, patches, or upgrades to the features, functionality or performance of the source code ("Enhancements") to anyone; however, if you choose to make your Enhancements available either publicly, or directly to Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, without imposing a separate written license agreement for such Enhancements, then you hereby grant the following license: a non-exclusive, royalty-free perpetual license to install, use, modify, prepare derivative works, incorporate into other computer software, distribute, and sublicense such enhancements or derivative works thereof, in binary and source code form.\
\

\b University of California, Sun Microsystems, and Scriptics ( Tcl )
\b0 \
This software is copyrighted by the Regents of the University of California, Sun Microsystems, Inc., Scriptics Corporation, and other parties.  The following terms apply to all files associated with the software unless explicitly disclaimed in individual files.\
The authors hereby grant permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and license this software and its documentation for any purpose, provided that existing copyright notices are retained in all copies and that this notice is included verbatim in any distributions. No written agreement, license, or royalty fee is required for any of the authorized uses. Modifications to this software may be copyrighted by their authors and need not follow the licensing terms described here, provided that the new terms are clearly indicated on the first page of each file where they apply.\
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR DISTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE TO ANY PARTY FOR DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, ITS DOCUMENTATION, OR ANY DERIVATIVES THEREOF, EVEN IF THE AUTHORS HAVE BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
THE AUTHORS AND DISTRIBUTORS SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, AND NON-INFRINGEMENT.  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ON AN AS IS BASIS, AND THE AUTHORS AND DISTRIBUTORS HAVE NO OBLIGATION TO PROVIDE MAINTENANCE, SUPPORT, UPDATES, ENHANCEMENTS, OR MODIFICATIONS.\
GOVERNMENT USE: If you are acquiring this software on behalf of the U.S. government, the Government shall have only Restricted Rights in the software and related documentation as defined in the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FARs) in Clause 52.227.19 \'a9 (2).  If you are acquiring the software on behalf of the Department of Defense, the software shall be classified as Commercial Computer Software and the Government shall have only Restricted Rights as defined in Clause 252.227-7013 \'a9 (1) of DFARs.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the authors grant the U.S. Government and others acting in its behalf permission to use and distribute the software in accordance with the terms specified in this license. \

\b \
University of Cambridge ( PCRE )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1997-2005 University of Cambridge\
PCRE LICENCE\
------------\
PCRE is a library of functions to support regular expressions whose syntax and semantics are as close as possible to those of the Perl 5 language.  Release 5 of PCRE is distributed under the terms of the "BSD" licence, as specified below. The documentation for PCRE, supplied in the "doc" directory, is distributed under the same terms as the software itself.\
Written by: Philip Hazel <ph10@cam.ac.uk>, University of Cambridge Computing Service, Cambridge, England. Phone: +44 1223 334714.\
Copyright \'a9 1997-2005 University of Cambridge. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
 Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
 Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
 Neither the name of the University of Cambridge nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b \
University of Chicago ( bonjour-py )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2000-2007 University of Chicago. All Rights Reserved.
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Access Grid Toolkit Public License (AGTPL)\
1) The "Software", below, refers to the Access Grid Toolkit (in  either source-code, or binary form and related documentation) and a  "work based on the Software" means a work based on either the  Software, on part of the Software, or on any derivative work of the  Software under copyright law: that is, a work containing all or a portion of the Software either verbatim or with modifications.  Each licensee is addressed as "you" or "Licensee."\
2) The University of Chicago as Operator of Argonne National Laboratory is the copyright holder in the Software.  The holder reserves all rights except those expressly granted to the Licensee herein and license rights held by the U.S. Government.\
3) A copy or copies of the Software may be given to others, if you meet the following conditions:\
a) Copies in source code form must include the copyright notice and this license.\
b) Copies in binary form must include the copyright notice and this license in the documentation.\
4) All advertising materials, journal articles and documentation mentioning features derived from or use of the Software must display the following acknowledgement: "This product includes software developed by and/or derived from the Access Grid project (http://www.accessgrid.org)."\
In the event that the product being advertised includes an intact Access Grid Toolkit distribution (with copyright and license included) then this clause is waived.\
5) You may make modifications to the Software, however, if you modify a copy or copies of the Software or any portion of it, thus forming a work based on the Software, and give a copy or copies of such work to  others, either in source code or binary form, you must meet the following conditions:\
a) The Software must carry prominent notices stating that you changed portions of the Software.\
b) The Software must display the following acknowledgement: "This product includes software developed by and/or derived from the Access Grid Project (http://www.accessgrid.org) to which the U.S. Government retains certain rights."\
6) LICENSEE AGREES THAT THE EXPORT OF GOODS AND/OR TECHNICAL DATA FROM THE UNITED STATES MAY REQUIRE SOME FORM OF EXPORT CONTROL LICENSE FROM THE U.S. GOVERNMENT AND THAT FAILURE TO OBTAIN SUCH EXPORT CONTROL LICENSE MAY RESULT IN CRIMINAL LIABILITY UNDER U.S. LAWS.\
7) Portions of the Software resulted from work developed under a U.S. Government contract and are subject to the following license: the Government is granted for itself and others acting on its behalf a paid-up, nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide license in this computer software to reproduce, prepare derivative works, and perform publicly and display publicly.\
8) The Software was prepared, in part, as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Government.  Neither the United States, nor the University of Chicago, nor any contributors to the Access Grid Project or Access Grid Toolkit, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights.\
9) IN NO EVENT WILL THE UNITED STATES, THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO OR ANY CONTRIBUTORS TO THE ACCESS GRID PROJECT OR ACCESS GRID TOOLKIT BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES, INCLUDING DIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES RESULTING FROM EXERCISE OF THIS LICENSE AGREEMENT OR THE USE OF THE SOFTWARE. \
END OF LICENSE\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\qj
\cf0 University of Delaware ( Network Time Protocol )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 University of Delaware 1992-2010\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appears in all copies and that both the copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name University of Delaware not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission. The University of Delaware makes no representations about the suitability this software for any purpose. It is provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Bruce Korb ( libopts ) 
\b0 \
This file is part of AutoOpts, a companion to AutoGen.\
AutoOpts is free software.\
AutoOpts is Copyright \'a9 1992-2009 by Bruce Korb - all rights reserved.\
AutoOpts is available under any one of two licenses.\'a0 The license in use must be one of these two and the choice is under the control of the user of the license.\
The GNU Lesser General Public License, version 3 or later \
   See the files "COPYING.lgplv3" and "COPYING.gplv3"\
The Modified Berkeley Software Distribution License\
   See the file "COPYING.mbsd"\
These files have the following md5sums:\
   43b91e8ca915626ed3818ffb1b71248b pkg/libopts/COPYING.gplv3\
   06a1a2e4760c90ea5e1dad8dfaac4d39 pkg/libopts/COPYING.lgplv3\
   66a5cedaf62c4b2637025f049f9b826f pkg/libopts/COPYING.mbsd\
COPYING.mbsd:\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 [Apple Note: \'a0Use is under the Modified Berkeley Software Distribution License]
\b0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs24 \cf0 \
University of Illinois ( iperf )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1999-2007, The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois. All Rights Reserved. \
Iperf performance test: Mark Gates, Ajay Tirumala, Jim Ferguson, Jon Dugan, Feng Qin, Kevin Gibbs, John Estabrook, National Laboratory for Applied Network Research, National Center for Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software (Iperf) and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimers. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimers in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. Neither the names of the University of Illinois, NCSA, nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this Software without specific prior written permission.  THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE CONTRIBUTORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
\b \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural
\cf0 University of Illinois ( LLVM )
\b0 \
LLVM Release License\
University of Illinois/NCSA\
Open Source License\
Copyright \'a9 2003-2013 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.  All rights reserved.\
Developed by:  LLVM Team, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.  http://llvm.org\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal with the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimers.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimers in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the names of the LLVM Team, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this Software without specific prior written permission.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE CONTRIBUTORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS WITH THE SOFTWARE.\
Copyrights and Licenses for Third Party Software Distributed with LLVM:\
The LLVM software contains code written by third parties.  Such software will have its own individual LICENSE.TXT file in the directory in which it appears. This file will describe the copyrights, license, and restrictions which apply to that code.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
University of Minnesota ( METIS )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1995-2013, Regents of the University of Minnesota\
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
University of Tennessee ( CLAPACK )
\b0 \
Copyright  \'a9 1992-2008 The University of Tennessee. \'a0All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
- Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
- Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer listed in this license in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
- Neither the name of the copyright holders nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b \
University of Tokyo ( A simple C++ library for maximum entropy classification )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2005 Yoshimasa Tsuruoka\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
V8 Project Authors ( double-conversion )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006-2011, the V8 project authors. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\

\b \
S.R. van den Berg
\b0  
\b ( procmail )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1990-1999, S.R. van den Berg, The Netherlands.\
This package is open source software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of either:\
- the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation and can be found in the included file called COPYING; either version 2,  or (at your option) any later version, or \
- the Artistic License which can be found in the included file called Artistic.\
This package is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but without any warranty; without even the implied warranty of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.  See either the GNU General Public License or the Artistic License for more details.  For those of you that choose to use the GNU General Public License, my interpretation of the GNU General Public License is that no procmailrc script falls under the terms of the GPL unless you explicitly put said script under the terms of the GPL yourself.\
\

\b Vantage Research (successor to Lernout & Hauspie), et al. ( ProofReader )
\b0 \
IntelliWriter ProofReader text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.\
IntelliWriter ProofReader Catalan text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  Adapted from Catalan word list \'a9 1992 Universitat de Barcelona.  Reproduction or disassembly of embodied algorithms or database prohibited.\
IntelliWriter ProofReader Czech text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  Spelling database adapted from word list supplied by Jan Hajic. Reproduction or disassembly of embodied algorithms or database prohibited.\
IntelliWriter ProofReader Dutch text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  \
IntelliWriter ProofReader English text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  \
IntelliWriter ProofReader French text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  \
IntelliWriter ProofReader German text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  Spelling database adapted from word list supplied by Langenscheidt K.G. Reproduction or disassembly of embodied algorithms or database prohibited.\
IntelliWriter ProofReader Hungarian text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  Portions of technology and word list supplied by Morphologic.  Reproduction or disassembly of embodied algorithms or database prohibited.\
IntelliWriter ProofReader Italian text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  Spelling database adapted from word list supplied by Zanichelli S.p.A. Reproduction or disassembly of embodied algorithms or database prohibited.\
IntelliWriter ProofReader Polish text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  Portions of technology and word list supplied by Morphologic.  Reproduction or disassembly of embodied algorithms or database prohibited.\
IntelliWriter ProofReader Portuguese text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  Portions adapted from the Dicionario Academico da Lingua Portuguesa \'a9 1992 by Porto Editora.  Reproduction or disassembly of embodied algorithms or database prohibited.\
IntelliWriter ProofReader Russian text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  \
IntelliWriter ProofReader Spanish text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  \
IntelliWriter ProofReader Swedish text proofing software \'a9 2002 by Vantage Research.  All rights reserved.  \
\

\b Daniel Veillard ( libxml2, libxslt )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1998-2002 Daniel Veillard (libxml2); Copyright \'a9 2001-2002 Daniel Veillard (libxslt).  All Rights Reserved.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the \'93Software), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:  The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DANIEL VEILLARD BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of Daniel Veillard shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization from  him.\
\

\b Paul Vixie ( cron )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1988,1990,1993,1994 by Paul Vixie. All rights reserved.\
Distribute freely, except: don't remove my name from the source or documentation (don't take credit for my work), mark your changes (don't get me blamed for your possible bugs), don't alter or remove this notice.  May be sold if buildable source is provided to buyer.  No warrantee of any kind, express or implied, is included with this software; use at your own risk, responsibility for damages (if any) to anyone resulting from the use of this software rests entirely with the user.\
\

\b Vovida Networks Inc. ( reSIProcate )
\b0 \
The Vovida Software License, Version 1.0\
Copyright \'a9 2000 Vovida Networks, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. The names "VOCAL", "Vovida Open Communication Application Library", and "Vovida Open Communication Application Library (VOCAL)" must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. For written permission, please contact vocal@vovida.org.\
4. Products derived from this software may not be called "VOCAL", nor may "VOCAL" appear in their name, without prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL VOVIDA NETWORKS, INC. OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES IN EXCESS OF $1,000, NOR FOR ANY INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Larry Wall ( Perl Kit )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1989-1997 Larry Wall. All rights reserved.\
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of either: a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option) any later version, or b) the Artistic License which comes with this Kit.\
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See either the GNU General Public License or the Artistic License for more details.\
You should have received a copy of the Artistic License with this Kit, in the file named Artistic.  If not, I'll be glad to provide one.  You should also have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.\
For those of you that choose to use the GNU General Public License, my interpretation of the GNU General Public License is that no Perl script falls under the terms of the GPL unless you explicitly put said script under the terms of the GPL yourself.  Furthermore, any object code linked with perl does not automatically fall under the terms of the GPL, provided such object code only adds definitions of subroutines and variables, and does not otherwise impair the resulting interpreter from executing any standard Perl script.  I consider linking in C subroutines in this manner to be the moral equivalent of defining subroutines in the Perl language itself.  You may sell such an object file as proprietary provided that you provide or offer to provide the Perl source, as specified by the GNU General Public License.  (This is merely an alternate way of specifying input to the program.)  You may also sell a binary produced by the dumping of a running Perl script that belongs to you, provided that you provide or offer to provide the Perl source as specified by the GPL.  (The fact that a Perl interpreter and your code are in the same binary file is, in this case, a form of mere aggregation.)  This is my interpretation of the GPL.  If you still have concerns or difficulties understanding my intent, feel free to contact me.  Of course, the Artistic License spells all this out for your protection, so you may prefer to use that.\
\

\b The WebKit Open Source Project ( including portions from the khtml, kcanvas, kdom, and ksvg2 projects ) and JavaScriptCore Project ( including portions from the kjs project )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1997-2017 Various WebKit contributors.  http://www.webkit.org/\
The WebKit, WebCore and JavaScriptCore software is open source software with portions licensed under a BSD license (see Apple's example below) and portions licensed under the GNU Library General Public License Version 2.  Please refer to the individual files to determine the license terms that apply to that file.  You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the LGPL-licensed portions under the terms of LGPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple.  The WebKit software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the LGPL for more details; a copy of the LGPL is included with this product.\
The khtml software is released under the GNU Library General Public License Version 2.\
The kjs software is released under the GNU Library General Public License Version 2.  The authors also thank the following people for their help:  Richard Moore, Daegeun Lee, Marco Pinelli, and Christian Kirsch.  The kcanvas, kdom and ksvg2 software is released under the GNU Library General Public License Version 2.  \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 BSD LICENSE
\b0 \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1.  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
2.  Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. \
3.  Neither the name of Apple Inc. ("Apple") nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY APPLE AND ITS CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL APPLE OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\fs24 \

\b\fs20 GNU LIBRARY GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
\b0 \
Version 2, June 1991\
[Apple note:  For a copy of the GNU Library General Public License, please refer to the Easy Software Products (CUPS) attribution, where a copy of the LGPL is included]\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 The WebRTC Project Authors ( LibWebRTC )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2011, The WebRTC project authors. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
  * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
  * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
  * Neither the name of Google nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Juergen Weigert, Michael Schroeder, Oliver Laumann ( screen )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1993-2000 Juergen Weigert, Michael Schroeder.  Copyright \'a9 1987 Oliver Laumann.
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the screen software under the terms of GNU General Public License (GPL), without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple.  The screen software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GPL for more details; a copy of the GPL is included with this product.
\fs20 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs24 \cf0 \
Marcel Weiher ( MPWXmlKit, MPWFoundation, ObjectiveXML )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001-2006 Marcel Weiher. All rights reserved.\
Objective-XML is copyrighted and licensed under an MIT-style license, so it is OK to use in commercial products (with attribution).  It can also be licensed under GPL for projects requiring this.\
Copyright \'a9 1999-2006 by Marcel Weiher, All Rights Reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name Marcel Weiher nor the names of contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Jim Weirich ( rake )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2003, 2004 Jim Weirich.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BELIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b Why the lucky stiff ( hpricot )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2006 why the lucky stiff\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\

\b \
Why the Lucky Stiff ( RedCloth )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2004 why the lucky stiff (and his puppet organizations.)\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name Textile nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR  CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
\
WIDE Project, et al. ( IPsec-Tools, racoon )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 WIDE Project.  All rights reserved.\
Copyright \'a9  2004 SuSE Linux AG, Nuernberg, Germany.  Contributed by: Michal Ludvig <mludvig@suse.cz>, SUSE Labs.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of the project nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE PROJECT AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE PROJECT OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Copyright \'a9 2000 Wasabi Systems, Inc., Copyright \'a9 2004-2006 Emmanuel Dreyfus.  All rights reserved.  This software was written by Frank van der Linden of Wasabi Systems for Zembu Labs, Inc. http://www.zembu.com/\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. The name of Wasabi Systems, Inc. may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY WASABI SYSTEMS, INC. ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL WASABI SYSTEMS, INC BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Winning Strategies
\b0  
\b ( asa )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1993, 1994 Winning Strategies, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by Winning Strategies, Inc.  4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Jean-Claude Wippler ( MetaKit )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1996-1999 Jean-Claude Wippler.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the Software), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies  of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:   The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE. \
\

\b World Wide Web Consortium ( tidylib )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1998-2003 World Wide Web Consortium (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, European Research Consortium for Informatics and Mathematics, Keio University).  All Rights Reserved.\
This software and documentation is provided "as is," and the copyright holders and contributing author(s) make no representations or warranties, express or implied, including but not limited to, warranties of merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose or that the use of the software or documentation will not infringe any third party patents, copyrights, trademarks or other rights. \
The copyright holders and contributing author(s) will not be held liable for any direct, indirect, special or consequential damages arising out of any use of the software or documentation, even if advised of the possibility of such damage.\
Permission is hereby granted to use, copy, modify, and distribute this source code, or portions hereof, documentation and executables, for any purpose, without fee, subject to the following restrictions:\
1. The origin of this source code must not be misrepresented.\
2. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such and must not be misrepresented as being the original source.\
3. This Copyright notice may not be removed or altered from any source or altered source distribution.\
The copyright holders and contributing author(s) specifically permit, without fee, and encourage the use of this source code as a component for supporting the Hypertext Markup Language in commercial products. If you use this source code in a product, acknowledgment is not required but would be appreciated.\
\

\b XDoclet Team ( XDoclet )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2000-2003, XDoclet Team. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification,are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  Neither the name of the XDoclet team nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. \
\

\b Xiph.org Foundation ( Speex )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2002-2003, Jean-Marc Valin/Xiph.Org Foundation.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of Xiph.org Foundation nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANYTHEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\b \
\
Xsan File System
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 Quantum Corporation. All rights not granted under license are reserved.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs20 \cf0 getopt, queue.h, strtoll.c
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1997-2004 The Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by the University of California, Berkeley and its contributors.\
4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS \'93AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b libedit\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1992, 1993 The Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved.\
This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by Christos Zoulas of Cornell University.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS \'93AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
Copyright \'a9 1997 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.  All rights reserved.\
This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation by Jaromir Dolecek.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions  are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS   \'93AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS  INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN  CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)  ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE  POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
Copyright \'a9 2001 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.  All rights reserved.\
This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation by Anthony Mallet.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions  are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS   \'93AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS  INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN  CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)  ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE  POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 readline.h\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1997 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.  All rights reserved.\
This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation by Jaromir Dolecek.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions  are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by the NetBSD Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.\
4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS   \'93AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS  INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN  CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)  ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE  POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 utf8.h\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 COPYRIGHT AND PERMISSION NOTICE\
Copyright \'a9 1991-2011 Unicode, Inc. All rights reserved. Distributed under the Terms of Use in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.unicode.org/copyright.html"}}{\fldrslt http://www.unicode.org/copyright.html}}.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of the Unicode data files and any associated documentation (the "Data Files") or Unicode software and any associated documentation (the "Software") to deal in the Data Files or Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies of the Data Files or Software, and to permit persons to whom the Data Files or Software are furnished to do so, provided that (a) the above copyright notice(s) and this permission notice appear with all copies of the Data Files or Software, (b) both the above copyright notice(s) and this permission notice appear in associated documentation, and \'a9 there is clear notice in each modified Data File or in the Software as well as in the documentation associated with the Data File(s) or Software that the data or software has been modified.\
THE DATA FILES AND SOFTWARE ARE PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR HOLDERS INCLUDED IN THIS NOTICE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, OR ANY SPECIAL INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THE DATA FILES OR SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of a copyright holder shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in these Data Files or Software without prior written authorization of the copyright holder.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b\fs24 \cf0 \
Vladimir Yakovchuk, Oleg Podgurniy, Dmytro Kovalyov,\'a0Maksym Polyakov, Andriy Rysin Valentyn Solomko, Volodymyr M. Lisivka & Eugeniy Meshcheryakov ( ispell-uk )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1999,\'a0Vladimir Yakovchuk & Oleg Podgurniy\
Copyright \'a9 2001, Dmytro Kovalyov,\'a0Maksym Polyakov & Andriy Rysin\
Copyright \'a9 2002, Valentyn Solomko & Volodymyr M. Lisivka\
Copyright \'a9 2005, Andriy Rysin, Eugeniy Meshcheryakov & Dmytro Kovalyov\
Copyright \'a9 2006-2009,\'a0Andriy Rysin\
This dictionary is licensed under GPL, LGPL and MPL (Mozilla Public License) licenses.\
GNU General Public License (GPL), GNU Library or Lesser General Public License (LGPL), Mozilla Public License 1.1 (MPL 1.1)
\b \
\
Akira Yamada ( ruby_termios )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1999, 2000, 2002 Akira Yamada.\
You can obtain the ruby_termios source here:  http://rubyforge.org/projects/termios/.\
Ruby_termios is released under the Ruby license.  
\fs20 [Apple note:  For a copy of the Ruby License, please refer to the Yukihiro Matsumoto (Ruby) attribution, where a copy of the Ruby LIcense is included]
\fs24 \
\

\b Shigio Yamaguchi, Tama Communications Corporation ( rel2abs )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1997 Shigio Yamaguchi. All rights reserved.\
Copyright \'a9 1999 Tama Communications Corporation. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\b \cf0 Susumu Yata ( marisa-trie )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2010-2012, Susumu Yata. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. \
Neither the name of the <ORGANIZATION> nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Xiph.Org, et. al ( Opus )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2001-2011 Xiph.Org, Skype Limited, Octasic, Jean-Marc Valin, Timothy B. Terriberry, CSIRO, Gregory Maxwell, Mark Borgerding, Erik de Castro Lopo\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOTLIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Nicholas C. Zakas ( ESLint )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2013 Nicholas C. Zakas. All rights reserved. \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Zope Corporation and Contributors ( Zope Interfaces )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2004 Zope Corporation and Contributors\
ZPL 2.1\
Zope Public License (ZPL) Version 2.1\
A copyright notice accompanies this license document that identifies the copyright holders.  This license has been certified as open source. It has also been designated as GPL compatible by the Free Software Foundation (FSF).\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions in source code must retain the accompanying copyright notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the accompanying copyright notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Names of the copyright holders must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission from the copyright holders.\
The right to distribute this software or to use it for any purpose does not give you the right to use Servicemarks (sm) or Trademarks (tm) of the copyright holders. Use of them is covered by separate agreement with the copyright holders.\
If any files are modified, you must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.\
Disclaimer\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Jean-Marc Zucconi ( WebDAV )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 1996 Jean-Marc Zucconi.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS AS IS AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Victor Zverovich ( fmt )
\b0 \
Copyright \'a9 2012 - 2016, Victor Zverovich  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Touch Bar Acknowledgments:
\b0 \
Portions of this Apple Software may utilize the following copyrighted material, the use of which is hereby acknowledged.\
\

\b Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. ( Bullet Collision Detection and Physics Library )
\b0 \
Copyright (c) 2012 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. http://bulletphysics.org \
This software is provided 'as-is', without any express or implied warranty. In no event will the authors be held liable for any damages arising from the use of this software. Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose, including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it freely, subject to the following restrictions: \
1. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not claim that you wrote the original software. If you use this software in a product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be appreciated but is not required. \
2. Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be misrepresented as being the original software. \
3. This notice may not be removed or altered from any source distribution.\
\

\b Ahmet A. Akin, Mehmet D. Akin. - Initial Developer ( Zemberek )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The Original Code is "Zemberek Dogal Dil Isleme Kutuphanesi" / The Initial Developer of the Original Code is Ahmet A. Akin, Mehmet D. Akin. / Portions created by the Initial Developer are Copyright (C) 2006 the Initial Developer. All Rights Reserved.\
The contents of this file are subject to the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/\
Software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing rights and limitations under the License.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Alice Group ( BSD kernel )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1993 Allen K. Briggs, Chris P. Caputo, Michael L. Finch, Bradley A. Grantham, and Lawrence A. Kesteloot. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by the Alice Group. 4. The names of the Alice Group or any of its members may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE ALICE GROUP AS IS AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ALICE GROUP BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 The ANGLE Project Authors (ANGLE Project)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2002-2010 The ANGLE Project Authors\
All Rights Reserved\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above \'a0copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of TransGaming Inc., Google Inc., 3DLabs Inc. Ltd., nor the names of their contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Apache Software Foundation ( Apache Lucene Core, Closure Library, Kaldi, OpenFst, SwiftProtobuf, Xerces )\

\b0 Apache License Version 2.0, January 2004\
TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR USE, REPRODUCTION, AND DISTRIBUTION\
1. Definitions.\
"License" shall mean the terms and conditions for use, reproduction, and distribution as defined by Sections 1 through 9 of this document.\
"Licensor" shall mean the copyright owner or entity authorized by the copyright owner that is granting the License.\
"Legal Entity" shall mean the union of the acting entity and all other entities that control, are controlled by, or are under common control with that entity. For the purposes of this definition, "control" means (i) the power, direct or indirect, to cause the direction or management of such entity, whether by contract or otherwise, or (ii) ownership of fifty percent (50%) or more of the outstanding shares, or (iii) beneficial ownership of such entity.\
"You" (or "Your") shall mean an individual or Legal Entity exercising permissions granted by this License.\
"Source" form shall mean the preferred form for making modifications, including but not limited to software source code, documentation source, and configuration files.\
"Object" form shall mean any form resulting from mechanical transformation or translation of a Source form, including but not limited to compiled object code, generated documentation, and conversions to other media types.\
"Work" shall mean the work of authorship, whether in Source or Object form, made available under the License, as indicated by a copyright notice that is included in or attached to the work (an example is provided in the Appendix below).\
"Derivative Works" shall mean any work, whether in Source or Object form, that is based on (or derived from) the Work and for which the editorial revisions, annotations, elaborations, or other modifications represent, as a whole, an original work of authorship. For the purposes of this License, Derivative Works shall not include works that remain separable from, or merely link (or bind by name) to the interfaces of, the Work and Derivative Works thereof.\
"Contribution" shall mean any work of authorship, including the original version of the Work and any modifications or additions to that Work or Derivative Works thereof, that is intentionally submitted to Licensor for inclusion in the Work by the copyright owner or by an individual or Legal Entity authorized to submit on behalf of the copyright owner. For the purposes of this definition, "submitted" means any form of electronic, verbal, or written communication sent to the Licensor or its representatives, including but not limited to communication on electronic mailing lists, source code control systems, and issue tracking systems that are managed by, or on behalf of, the Licensor for the purpose of discussing and improving the Work, but excluding communication that is conspicuously marked or otherwise designated in writing by the copyright owner as "Not a Contribution."\
"Contributor" shall mean Licensor and any individual or Legal Entity on behalf of whom a Contribution has been received by Licensor and subsequently incorporated within the Work.\
2. Grant of Copyright License. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, each Contributor hereby grants to You a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable copyright license to reproduce, prepare Derivative Works of, publicly display, publicly perform, sublicense, and distribute the Work and such Derivative Works in Source or Object form.\
3. Grant of Patent License. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, each Contributor hereby grants to You a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable (except as stated in this section) patent license to make, have made, use, offer to sell, sell, import, and otherwise transfer the Work, where such license applies only to those patent claims licensable by such Contributor that are necessarily infringed by their Contribution(s) alone or by combination of their Contribution(s) with the Work to which such Contribution(s) was submitted. If You institute patent litigation against any entity (including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that the Work or a Contribution incorporated within the Work constitutes direct or contributory patent infringement, then any patent licenses granted to You under this License for that Work shall terminate as of the date such litigation is filed.\
4. Redistribution. You may reproduce and distribute copies of the Work or Derivative Works thereof in any medium, with or without modifications, and in Source or Object form, provided that You meet the following conditions:\
\'95 You must give any other recipients of the Work or Derivative Works a copy of this License; and\
\'95 You must cause any modified files to carry prominent notices stating that You changed the files; and\
\'95 You must retain, in the Source form of any Derivative Works that You distribute, all copyright, patent, trademark, and attribution notices from the Source form of the Work, excluding those notices that do not pertain to any part of the Derivative Works; and\
\'95 If the Work includes a "NOTICE" text file as part of its distribution, then any Derivative Works that You distribute must include a readable copy of the attribution notices contained within such NOTICE file, excluding those notices that do not pertain to any part of the Derivative Works, in at least one of the following places: within a NOTICE text file distributed as part of the Derivative Works; within the Source form or documentation, if provided along with the Derivative Works; or, within a display generated by the Derivative Works, if and wherever such third-party notices normally appear. The contents of the NOTICE file are for informational purposes only and do not modify the License. You may add Your own attribution notices within Derivative Works that You distribute, alongside or as an addendum to the NOTICE text from the Work, provided that such additional attribution notices cannot be construed as modifying the License. You may add Your own copyright statement to Your modifications and may provide additional or different license terms and conditions for use, reproduction, or distribution of Your modifications, or for any such Derivative Works as a whole, provided Your use, reproduction, and distribution of the Work otherwise complies with the conditions stated in this License.\
5. Submission of Contributions. Unless You explicitly state otherwise, any Contribution intentionally submitted for inclusion in the Work by You to the Licensor shall be under the terms and conditions of this License, without any additional terms or conditions. Notwithstanding the above, nothing herein shall supersede or modify the terms of any separate license agreement you may have executed with Licensor regarding such Contributions.\
6. Trademarks. This License does not grant permission to use the trade names, trademarks, service marks, or product names of the Licensor, except as required for reasonable and customary use in describing the origin of the Work and reproducing the content of the NOTICE file.\
7. Disclaimer of Warranty. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, Licensor provides the Work (and each Contributor provides its Contributions) on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied, including, without limitation, any warranties or conditions of TITLE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY, or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. You are solely responsible for determining the appropriateness of using or redistributing the Work and assume any risks associated with Your exercise of permissions under this License.\
8. Limitation of Liability. In no event and under no legal theory, whether in tort (including negligence), contract, or otherwise, unless required by applicable law (such as deliberate and grossly negligent acts) or agreed to in writing, shall any Contributor be liable to You for damages, including any direct, indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages of any character arising as a result of this License or out of the use or inability to use the Work (including but not limited to damages for loss of goodwill, work stoppage, computer failure or malfunction, or any and all other commercial damages or losses), even if such Contributor has been advised of the possibility of such damages.\
9. Accepting Warranty or Additional Liability. While redistributing the Work or Derivative Works thereof, You may choose to offer, and charge a fee for, acceptance of support, warranty, indemnity, or other liability obligations and/or rights consistent with this License. However, in accepting such obligations, You may act only on Your own behalf and on Your sole responsibility, not on behalf of any other Contributor, and only if You agree to indemnify, defend, and hold each Contributor harmless for any liability incurred by, or claims asserted against, such Contributor by reason of your accepting any such warranty or additional liability.\
END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS\
APPENDIX: How to apply the Apache License to your work\
To apply the Apache License to your work, attach the following boilerplate notice, with the fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying information. (Don't include the brackets!) The text should be enclosed in the appropriate comment syntax for the file format. We also recommend that a file or class name and description of purpose be included on the same "printed page" as the copyright notice for easier identification within third-party archives.\
Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]\
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");\uc0\u8232 you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.\u8232 You may obtain a copy of the License at\
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software\uc0\u8232 distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,\u8232 WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.\u8232 See the License for the specific language governing permissions and\u8232 limitations under the License.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Ashima Arts and Stefan Gustavson ( webgl-noise )\uc0\u8232 
\b0 Copyright \'a9 2011 by Ashima Arts (Simplex noise)\uc0\u8232 Copyright \'a9 2011 by Stefan Gustavson (Classic noise)\u8232 Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the \'93Software\'94), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\uc0\u8232 THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \'93AS IS,\'94 WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES, OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF, OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\

\b AT&T ( C Library )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The author of this software is David M. Gay. Copyright \'a9 1991 by AT&T.\'a0\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose without fee is hereby granted, provided that this entire notice is included in all copies of any software which is or includes a copy or modification of this software and in all copies of the supporting documentation for such software.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED AS IS, WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTY. IN PARTICULAR, NEITHER THE AUTHOR NOR AT&T MAKES ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE MERCHANTABILITY OF THIS SOFTWARE OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Stefano Barbato ( Mimetic )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The MIT License\
Copyright \'a9 2009 Stefano Barbato\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 David Beckett et al. ( Redland )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2000-2012 David Beckett\
Copyright \'a9 2000-2005 University of Bristol.\
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at:  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License. [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Bitstream Inc. and Tavmjong Bah ( Bitstream Vera Font, Bitstream DejaVu Font )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Fonts are \'a9 Bitstream (see below). DejaVu changes are in public domain. Explanation of copyright is on Gnome page on Bitstream Vera fonts. Glyphs imported from Arev fonts are \'a9 Tavmjung Bah (see below).\
Bitstream Vera Fonts Copyright:\
Copyright \'a9 2003 by Bitstream, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Bitstream Vera is a trademark of Bitstream, Inc.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of the fonts accompanying this license ("Fonts") and associated documentation files (the "Font Software"), to reproduce and distribute the Font Software, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies of the Font Software, and to permit persons to whom the Font Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright and trademark notices and this permission notice shall be included in all copies of one or more of the Font Software typefaces.\
The Font Software may be modified, altered, or added to, and in particular the designs of glyphs or characters in the Fonts may be modified and additional glyphs or characters may be added to the Fonts, only if the fonts are renamed to names not containing either the words "Bitstream" or the word "Vera".\
This License becomes null and void to the extent applicable to Fonts or Font Software that has been modified and is distributed under the "Bitstream Vera" names.\
The Font Software may be sold as part of a larger software package but no copy of one or more of the Font Software typefaces may be sold by itself.\
THE FONT SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT, PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR OTHER RIGHT. IN NO EVENT SHALL BITSTREAM OR THE GNOME FOUNDATION BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE FONT SOFTWARE OR FROM OTHER DEALINGS IN THE FONT SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the names of Gnome, the Gnome Foundation, and Bitstream Inc., shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Font Software without prior written authorization from the Gnome Foundation or Bitstream Inc., respectively. For further information, contact: fonts at gnome dot org.\
Arev Fonts Copyright:\
Copyright \'a9 2006 by Tavmjong Bah. All Rights Reserved.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of the fonts accompanying this license ("Fonts") and associated documentation files (the "Font Software"), to reproduce and distribute the modifications to the Bitstream Vera Font Software, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies of the Font Software, and to permit persons to whom the Font Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright and trademark notices and this permission notice shall be included in all copies of one or more of the Font Software typefaces.\
The Font Software may be modified, altered, or added to, and in particular the designs of glyphs or characters in the Fonts may be modified and additional glyphs or characters may be added to the Fonts, only if the fonts are renamed to names not containing either the words "Tavmjong Bah" or the word "Arev".\
This License becomes null and void to the extent applicable to Fonts or Font Software that has been modified and is distributed under the "Tavmjong Bah Arev" names.\
The Font Software may be sold as part of a larger software package but no copy of one or more of the Font Software typefaces may be sold by itself.\
THE FONT SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT, PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR OTHER RIGHT. IN NO EVENT SHALL TAVMJONG BAH BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE FONT SOFTWARE OR FROM OTHER DEALINGS IN THE FONT SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of Tavmjong Bah shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Font Software without prior written authorization from Tavmjong Bah. For further information, contact: tavmjong@free.fr.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 David Blackman and Sebastiano Vigna ( xoroshiro 128+ )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Written in 2016 by David Blackman and Sebastiano Vigna (vigna@acm.org)\
To the extent possible under law, the author has dedicated all copyright and related and neighboring rights to this software to the public domain worldwide. This software is distributed without any warranty.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Mark Borgerding ( KISS FFT )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2003-2010, Mark Borgerding. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the author nor the names of any contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Stig Brautaset ( json-framework )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2008 Stig Brautaset. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of the author nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Carnegie Mellon University ( Mach Operating System )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1991 Carnegie Mellon University. All rights reserved.\
Permission to use, copy, modify and distribute this software and its documentation is hereby granted, provided that both the copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies of the software, derivative works or modified versions, and any portions thereof, and that both notices appear in supporting documentation.\
CARNEGIE MELLON ALLOWS FREE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE IN ITS AS IS CONDITION. CARNEGIE MELLON DISCLAIMS ANY LIABILITY OF ANY KIND FOR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
Carnegie Mellon requests users of this software to return to Software.Distribution@CS.CMU.EDU; or Software Distribution Coordinator, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA 15213-3890; any improvements or extensions that they make and grant Carnegie Mellon the rights to redistribute these changes.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Carnegie Mellon University; Paul Mackerras ( pppd )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1993-2002 Paul Mackerras. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. The name(s) of the authors of this software must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. 4. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following acknowledgment: This product includes software developed by Paul Mackerras<paulus@samba.org>.\
THE AUTHORS OF THIS SOFTWARE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
Derived from main.c, which is:\
Copyright \'a9 1984-2000 Carnegie Mellon University. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. The name Carnegie Mellon University must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. For permission or any other legal details, please contact: Office of Technology Transfer, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890. (412) 268-4387, fax: (412) 268-7395, tech-transfer@andrew.cmu.edu. 4. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following acknowledgment: This product includes software developed by Computing Services at Carnegie Mellon University (http://www.cmu.edu/computing/).\
CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Stephen Celis ( SQLite.swift )\

\b0 The MIT License (MIT)\
Copyright \'a9 2014-2015 Stephen Celis (<stephen@stephencelis.com>)\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Fabio Checconi, Luigi Rizzo, Paolo Valente ( Quick Fair Queueing )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2010 Fabio Checconi, Luigi Rizzo, Paolo Valente. All rights reserved\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin ( LIBSVM )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2000-2014 Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin\
All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither name of copyright holders nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Juliusz Chroboczek ( babeld, shncpd )\

\b0 babeld:  Copyright \'a9 2007, 2008 by Juliusz Chroboczek\
shncpd:  Copyright \'a9 2015 by Juliusz Chroboczek\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 The Chromium Authors ( Chromium, HSTS preloaded list )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Chromium:  Copyright \'a9 2015 The Chromium Authors. All rights reserved.\
HSTS preloaded list:  Copyright \'a9 2013 The Chromium Authors.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Cisco Systems, Inc. ( SRTP )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2001-2006, Cisco Systems, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of the Cisco Systems, Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Brian M. Clapper ( poll )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1995-2002 Brian M. Clapper. All rights reserved.\'a0\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright notice and comment; (2) modifications made to the software are prominently mentioned, and a copy of the original software (or a pointer to its location) are included; and (3) distributions including binaries display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by Brian M Clapper, <bmc@clapper.org> in the documentation or other materials provided with the distribution. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\'a0\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\'a0\
Effectively, this means you can do what you want with the software except remove this notice or take advantage of the author's name. If you modify the software and redistribute your modified version, you must indicate that your version is a modification of the original, and you must provide either a pointer to or a copy of the original.\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 
\b CNRA ( Wapiti )\

\b0 Copyright (c) 2009-2013 CNRS All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Yann Collet ( xxHash )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 xxHash Library \
Copyright \'a9 2012-2014, Yann Collet. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
*  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
*  Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS \'93AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Lasse Collins, et al. ( XZ Utils )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 This software includes code from XZ Utils, which is provided under the following terms:\
You can do whatever you want with the files that have been put into the public domain. If you find public domain legally problematic, take the previous sentence as a license grant. If you still find the lack of copyright legally problematic, you have too many lawyers. As usual, this software is provided "as is", without any warranty. If you copy significant amounts of public domain code from XZ Utils into your project, acknowledging this somewhere in your software is polite (especially if it is proprietary, non-free software), but naturally it is not legally required. Here is an example of a good notice to put into "about box" or into documentation: This software includes code from XZ Utils.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Frank Denis ( dnscrypt-proxy )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2011-2017 Frank Denis <j at pureftpd dot org>\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Deusty ( CocoaHTTPServer )\

\b0 Software License Agreement (BSD License)\
Copyright \'a9 2011, Deusty, LLC. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use of this software in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Neither the name of Deusty nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission of Deusty, LLC.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Digital Equipment Corporation ( BSD kernel )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Portions Copyright \'a9 1993 by Digital Equipment Corporation.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies, and that the name of Digital Equipment Corporation not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the document or software without specific, written prior permission.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS AND DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP. DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORPORATION BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Paul R. Dixon et al. ( OpenDcd )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright 2013 Paul R. Dixon\
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. \
You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
THIS CODE IS PROVIDED *AS IS* BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION ANY IMPLIED // WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF TITLE, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, MERCHANTABLITY OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.\
See the Apache 2 License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Greg Douglas ( RTreeTemplate )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1983 Antonin Guttman and Michael Stonebraker, UC Berkeley, Copyright \'a9 1994 Melinda Green, Copyright \'a9 1995 Paul Brook, Copyright \'a9 2004 Greg Douglas\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Giacomo Drago ( minijson )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2015, Giacomo Drago <giacomo@giacomodrago.com>  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of Giacomo Drago nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY GIACOMO DRAGO "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL GIACOMO DRAGO BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b The DragonFly Project (DragonFly)\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2008 The DragonFly Project. All rights reserved.\
This code is derived from software contributed to The DragonFly Project by Matthew Dillon <dillon@backplane.com>\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific, prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Hiroaki Etoh, Federico G. Schwindt, and Miodrag Vallat ( stack_protector.c )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2002 Hiroaki Etoh, Federico G. Schwindt, and Miodrag Vallat. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Michael Everson ( Unicode Mapping Tables )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Used with permission from the author.\
FreeBSD, Inc. ( BSD Operating System )\
This product contains software provided by FreeBSD, Inc. and its contributors.\
Copyright \'a9 1994-2007 FreeBSD, Inc. All rights reserved.\'a0\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\'a0\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\'a0\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE FREEBSD PROJECT AS IS AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FREEBSD PROJECT OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\'a0\
The views and conclusions contained in the software and documentation are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing official policies, either expressed or implied, of the FreeBSD Project or FreeBSD, Inc.\'a0\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Flying Meat Inc. ( FMDB )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2008-2014 Flying Meat Inc.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Free Software Foundation ( libstdc++ )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1988-2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc. (FSF).\
Parts of this software include the libstdc++ libraries owned by the FSF. You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the FSF software under the terms of GNU General Public License (GPL) with libstdc++ exception, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple. The FSF software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GPL for more details; a copy of the GPL is included below.\
GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE\
Version 2, June 1991\'a0\
Copyright \'a9 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.\'a0\
59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA\
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.\
Preamble\
The licenses for most software are designed to take away your freedom to share and change it. By contrast, the GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free software--to make sure the software is free for all its users. This General Public License applies to most of the Free Software Foundation's software and to any other program whose authors commit to using it. (Some other Free Software Foundation software is covered by the GNU Library General Public License instead.) You can apply it to your programs, too.\'a0\
When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not price. Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for this service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new free programs; and that you know you can do these things.\'a0\
To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights. These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it.\'a0\
For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that you have. You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code. And you must show them these terms so they know their rights.\'a0\
We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and (2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify the software.\'a0\
Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make certain that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free software. If the software is modified by someone else and passed on, we want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original, so that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original authors' reputations.\'a0\
Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software patents. We wish to avoid the danger that redistributors of a free program will individually obtain patent licenses, in effect making the program proprietary. To prevent this, we have made it clear that any patent must be licensed for everyone's free use or not licensed at all.\'a0\
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and modification follow.\'a0\
TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION\
0. This License applies to any program or other work which contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be distributed under the terms of this General Public License. The Program, below, refers to any such program or work, and a work based on the Program means either the Program or any derivative work under copyright law: that is to say, a work containing the Program or a portion of it, either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated into another language. (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in the term modification.) Each licensee is addressed as you.\'a0\
Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not covered by this License; they are outside its scope. The act of running the Program is not restricted, and the output from the Program is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the Program (independent of having been made by running the Program). Whether that is true depends on what the Program does.\'a0\
1. You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty; and give any other recipients of the Program a copy of this License along with the Program.\'a0\
You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee.\'a0\
2. You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion of it, thus forming a work based on the Program, and copy and distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1 above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:\'a0\
a) You must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.\
b) You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that in whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or any part thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to all third parties under the terms of this License.\'a0\
c) If the modified program normally reads commands interactively when run, you must cause it, when started running for such interactive use in the most ordinary way, to print or display an announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a notice that there is no warranty (or else, saying that you provide a warranty) and that users may redistribute the program under these conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy of this License. (Exception: if the Program itself is interactive but does not normally print such an announcement, your work based on the Program is not required to print an announcement.)\'a0\
These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole. If identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Program,and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those sections when you distribute them as separate works. But when you distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based on the Program, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it.\'a0\
Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or collective works based on the Program.\
In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Program with the Program (or with a work based on the Program) on a volume of a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under the scope of this License.\'a0\
3. You may copy and distribute the Program (or a work based on it, under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following:\'a0\
a) Accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or,\'a0\
b) Accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three years, to give any third party, for a charge no more than your cost of physically performing source distribution, a complete machine-readable copy of the corresponding source code, to be distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or,\'a0\
c) Accompany it with the information you received as to the offer to distribute corresponding source code. (This alternative is allowed only for noncommercial distribution and only if you received the program in object code or executable form with such an offer, in accord with Subsection b above.)\'a0\
The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for making modifications to it. For an executable work, complete source code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to control compilation and installation of the executable. However, as a special exception, the source code distributed need not include anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component itself accompanies the executable.\'a0\
If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent access to copy the source code from the same place counts as distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not compelled to copy the source along with the object code.\'a0\
4. You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program except as expressly provided under this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Program is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License. However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance.\'a0\
5. You are not required to accept this License, since you have not signed it. However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or distribute the Program or its derivative works. These actions are prohibited by law if you do not accept this License. Therefore, by modifying or distributing the Program (or any work based on the Program), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying the Program or works based on it.\'a0\
6. Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on the Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to these terms and conditions. You may not impose any further restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein. You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties to this License.\'a0\
7. If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues), conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not excuse you from the conditions of this License. If you cannot distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may not distribute the Program at all. For example, if a patent license would not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Program by all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to refrain entirely from distribution of the Program.\'a0\
If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other circumstances.\'a0\
It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the integrity of the free software distribution system, which is implemented by public license practices. Many people have made generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed through that system in reliance on consistent application of that system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot impose that choice.\'a0\
This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to be a consequence of the rest of this License.\'a0\
8. If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the original copyright holder who places the Program under this License may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among countries not thus excluded. In such case, this License incorporates the limitation as if written in the body of this License.\'a0\
9. The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of the General Public License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.\'a0\
Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Program specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and any later version, you have the option of following the terms and conditions either of that version or of any later version published by the Free Software Foundation. If the Program does not specify a version number of this License, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software Foundation.\'a0\
10. If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to the author to ask for permission. For software which is copyrighted by the Free Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes make exceptions for this. Our decision will be guided by the two goals of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.\'a0\
NO WARRANTY\
11. BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW. EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM AS IS WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU. SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.\'a0\
12. IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.\'a0\
END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Free Software Foundation ( GNU libiconv )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc. (FSF).\
GNU libiconv is owned by the FSF and licensed under the terms of the GNU Library General Public License, Version 2 (LGPL). You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the libiconv software under the terms of LGPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple. The libiconv software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the LGPL for more details; a copy of the LGPL is included with this product.\
GNU LIBRARY GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE\
Version 2, June 1991\
[Apple note: For a copy of the GNU Library General Public License, please refer to the WebKit attribution, where a copy of the LGPL is included]\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Free Software Foundation ( ncurses )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001 Free Software Foundation, Inc.\'a0\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the Software), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\'a0\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\'a0\
Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b The FreeType Project ( FreeType )\

\b0 Portions of this software are copyright 2000-2006, 2007 The FreeType Project (www.freetype.org) (authors: David Turner, Robert Wilhelm, Werner Lemberg). All rights reserved.\
The FreeType Project License may be found at http://freetype.sourceforge.net/FTL.TXT\
THE FREETYPE PROJECT IS PROVIDED `AS IS' WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. IN NO EVENT WILL ANY OF THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES CAUSED BY THE USE OR THE INABILITY TO USE, OF THE FREETYPE PROJECT.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Eric Friedman and Itay Maman ( Boost C++ Libraries ) \

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2002, 2003 Eric Friedman, Itay Maman\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person or organization obtaining a copy of the software and accompanying documentation covered by this license (the "Software") to use, reproduce, display, distribute, execute, and transmit the Software, and to prepare derivative works of the Software, and to permit third-parties to whom the Software is furnished to do so, all subject to the following:  \
The copyright notices in the Software and this entire statement, including the above license grant, this restriction and the following disclaimer, must be included in all copies of the Software, in whole or in part, and all derivative works of the Software, unless such copies or derivative works are solely in the form of machine-executable object code generated by a source language processor.  \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR ANYONE DISTRIBUTING THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE. \
\uc0\u8232 
\b Ruoyu Fu ( SwiftyJSON )\

\b0 The MIT License (MIT)\
Copyright \'a9 2014 Ruoyu Fu \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\b G-Truc Creation ( OpenGL Mathematics )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2005 - 2011 G-Truc Creation\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Jean-loup Gailly and Mark Adler ( zlib )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1995-2013 Jean-loup Gailly and Mark Adler.\
This software is provided 'as-is', without any express or implied warranty. In no event will the authors be held liable for any damages arising from the use of this software. Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose, including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it freely, subject to the following restrictions: \
1. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not claim that you wrote the original software. If you use this software in a product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be appreciated but is not required. \
2. Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be misrepresented as being the original software. \
3. This notice may not be removed or altered from any source distribution.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Luca Di Gaspero ( QuadProg++ )\

\b0 MIT License\
Copyright \'a9 2007-2016 Luca Di Gaspero\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Geomag\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Geomag software courtesy of http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/geomag/WMM/\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Aaron D. Gifford ( SHA2 )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2000-2001, Aaron D. Gifford. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTOR(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTOR(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION).\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Brian Gladman ( AES implementation, SHA2 Message Digest )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2003, Dr Brian Gladman, Worcester, UK. All rights reserved.\
LICENSE TERMS\
The free distribution and use of this software in both source and binary form is allowed (with or without changes) provided that:\'a0\
1. distributions of this source code include the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer;\
2. distributions in binary form include the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other associated materials;\
3. the copyright holder's name is not used to endorse products built using this software without specific written permission.\
ALTERNATIVELY, provided that this notice is retained in full, this product may be distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL), in which case the provisions of the GPL apply INSTEAD OF those given above.\
DISCLAIMER\
This software is provided 'as is' with no explicit or implied warranties in respect of its properties, including, but not limited to, correctness and/or fitness for purpose.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Brian Gladman (AES-XTS)\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1998-2008, Brian Gladman, Worcester, UK. All rights reserved.\
LICENSE TERMS\
The free distribution and use of this software is allowed (with or without changes) provided that:\
1. source code distributions include the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer;\
2. binary distributions include the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in their documentation;\
3. the name of the copyright holder is not used to endorse products built using this software without specific written permission.\
DISCLAIMER\
This software is provided 'as is' with no explicit or implied warranties in respect of its properties, including, but not limited to, correctness and/or fitness for purpose.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Global IP Sound ( iLBC codec )\

\b0 All use of the Original Code (GIPS iLBC, and code provided by GIPS as part of any related IETF Standard or draft standard) is subject to the complete Global IP Sound iLBC Public License, IETF Standard, Limited Commercial Use (the (License\'94). By accessing the Original Code You agree to the License terms. PLEASE SEE THE COMPLETE LICENSE BELOW FOR ADDITIONAL TERMS. In general:\'a0\
- Personal, non-commercial use is generally permitted.\'a0\
- Commercialization is permitted with certain limitations; for example, to ensure that every iLBC decoder can decode every iLBC-encoded payload, commercial \'93Deployment\'94 must comply with the applicable IETF Standard/draft, and the format of the bitstream may not be modified.\'a0\
- You are provided no warranty or support, and all liability is disclaimed.\'a0\
- You must register this license with GIPS prior to any commercial Deployment.\'a0\
The License is available from http://www.globalipsound.com/legal/licenses/ilbc; or from Global IP Sound Europe AB, \'85landsgatan 42, SE-116 63, Stockholm, Sweden, +46.8.545.5.30.40 tel, +46.8.545.5.30.49 fax; or from Global IP Sound Inc.,900 Kearny Street, 5thFloor, San Francisco, California 94133-5124 USA, +1 415.397.2555 tel, +1 415.397.2577 fax; or by sending a request to info@globalipsound.com.\'a0\
The current IETF Standards can also be found at http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3951.txt plus http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3952.txt. The initial developer of the Original Code is Global IP Sound Inc. Portions Copyright \'a9 1999-2005, All Rights Reserved.\'a0\
iLBC is a trademark of Global IP Sound. All redistribution is subject to the License; source code must include this Notice.\'a0\
Glyph & Cog, LLC (Xpdf JBIG2 decoder)\
Portions of this product \'a9 2002-2005 Glyph & Cog, LLC. The Xpdf JBIG2 decoder is used under license.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Google ( curve25519-donna )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2008, Google Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
curve25519-donna: Curve25519 elliptic curve, public key function.\'a0\
http://code.google.com/p/curve25519-donna/\
Adam Langley <agl@imperialviolet.org>\
Derived from public domain C code by Daniel J. Bernstein <djb@cr.yp.to>. More information about curve25519 can be found here http://cr.yp.to/ecdh.html. djb's sample implementation of curve25519 is written in a special assembly language called qhasm and uses the floating point registers. This is, almost, a clean room reimplementation from the curve25519 paper. It uses many of the tricks described therein. Only the crecip function is taken from the sample implementation.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Google Inc. ( FlatBuffers )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2014 Google Inc.\
Apache License Version 2.0, January 2004 http://www.apache.org/licenses/ [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Google Inc. ( J2ObjC )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 Google Inc.\
This library is distributed under the Apache 2.0 license found in the LICENSE file with the following exceptions. The protocol buffers library is distributed under the same BSD license as Google's protocol buffers. [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Google Inc. ( Noto Fonts)\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2007-16 Google Inc. All Rights Reserved.\
This Font Software is licensed under the SIL Open Font License, Version 1.1. [Apple Note: For a copy of the SIL Open Font License, Version 1.1, please refer to the STI Pub Companies attribution, where a copy of the SIL Open Font License is included.]\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Google Inc. ( Protocol Buffers/protobuf, Snappy, TCMalloc ) \

\b0 Protocol Buffers/protobuf:  Copyright \'a9 2008 Google Inc. All rights reserved. \
Snappy:  Copyright \'a9 2011, Google Inc. All rights reserved. \
TCMalloc:\'a0 Copyright \'a9 2005, Google Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Code generated by the Protocol Buffer compiler is owned by the owner of the input file used when generating it.\'a0 This code is not standalone and requires a support library to be linked with it.\'a0 This support library is itself covered by the above license.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Stefan Gustavson ( SimplexNoise )\

\b0 Author: Stefan Gustavson, 2003-2005\
Contact: stegu@itn.liu.se\
This code was GPL licensed until February 2011. As the original author of this code, I hereby release it irrevocably into the public domain. Please feel free to use it for whatever you want. Credit is appreciated where appropriate, and I also appreciate being told where this code finds any use, but you may do as you like. Alternatively, if you want to have a familiar OSI-approved license, you may use This code under the terms of the MIT license:\
Copyright \'a9 2003-2005 by Stefan Gustavson. All rights reserved.\
This code is licensed to you under the terms of the MIT license:\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Gabriel Handford ( MessagePack )\

\b0 The MIT License (MIT)\
Copyright \'a9 2014 Gabriel Handford\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b The HDF Group ( HDF5 )\uc0\u8232 
\b0 HDF5 (Hierarchical Data Format 5) Software Library and Utilities\
Copyright 2006-2015 by The HDF Group.\
NCSA HDF5 (Hierarchical Data Format 5) Software Library and Utilities\
Copyright 1998-2006 by the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois.\
All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted for any purpose (including commercial purposes) provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or materials provided with the distribution.\
3. In addition, redistributions of modified forms of the source or binary code must carry prominent notices stating that the original code was changed and the date of the change.\
4. All publications or advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software are asked, but not required, to acknowledge that it was developed by The HDF Group and by the National Center for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and credit the contributors.\
5. Neither the name of The HDF Group, the name of the University, nor the name of any Contributor may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission from The HDF Group, the University, or the Contributor, respectively.\
DISCLAIMER: \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE HDF GROUP AND THE CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" WITH NO WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED.  In no event shall The HDF Group or the Contributors be liable for any damages suffered by the users arising out of the use of this software, even if advised of the possibility of such damage. \
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------\
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------\
Contributors:   National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois, Fortner Software, Unidata Program Center (netCDF), The Independent JPEG Group (JPEG), Jean-loup Gailly and Mark Adler (gzip), and Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC).\
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------\
Portions of HDF5 were developed with support from the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) and the United States Department of Energy under Prime Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.\
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------\
Portions of HDF5 were developed with support from the University of California, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (UC LLNL).  The following statement applies to those portions of the product and must \
be retained in any redistribution of source code, binaries, documentation, and/or accompanying materials:\
   This work was partially produced at the University of California, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (UC LLNL) under contract no. W-7405-ENG-48 (Contract 48) between the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) and The Regents of the University of California (University) for the operation of UC LLNL.\
   DISCLAIMER: \
   This work was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Government. Neither the United States Government nor the University of California nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately- owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial products, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or the University of California. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or the University of California, and shall not be used for advertising or product endorsement purposes.\
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Richard Hipp ( SQLite )\

\b0 SQLite Copyright\'a0\
All of the deliverable code in SQLite has been dedicated to the public domain by the authors. All code authors, and representatives of the companies they work for, have signed affidavits dedicating their contributions to the public domain and originals of those signed affidavits are stored in a firesafe at the main offices of Hwaci. Anyone is free to copy, modify, publish, use, compile, sell, or distribute the original SQLite code, either in source code form or as a compiled binary, for any purpose, commercial or non-commercial, and by any means.\
The previous paragraph applies to the deliverable code in SQLite - those parts of the SQLite library that you actually bundle and ship with a larger application. Portions of the documentation and some code used as part of the build process might fall under other licenses. The details here are unclear. We do not worry about the licensing of the documentation and build code so much because none of these things are part of the core deliverable SQLite library.\
All of the deliverable code in SQLite has been written from scratch. No code has been taken from other projects or from the open internet. Every line of code can be traced back to its original author, and all of those authors have public domain dedications on file. So the SQLite code base is clean and is uncontaminated with licensed code from other projects.\
Obtaining an Explicit License to Use SQLite\
Even though SQLite is in the public domain and does not require a license, some users want to obtain a license anyway. Some reasons for obtaining a license include:\
* You are using SQLite in a jurisdiction that does not recognize the public domain.\
* You are using SQLite in a jurisdiction that does not recognize the right of an author to dedicate their work to the public domain.\
* You want to hold a tangible legal document as evidence that you have the legal right to use and distribute SQLite.\
* Your legal department tells you that you have to purchase a license.\
If you feel like you really have to purchase a license for SQLite, Hwaci, the company that employs the architect and principal developers of SQLite, will sell you one. Contributed Code\
In order to keep SQLite complete free and unencumbered by copyright, other contributors to the SQLite code base are asked to likewise dedicate their contributions to the public domain. If you want to send a patch or enhancement for possible inclusion in the SQLite source tree, please accompany the patch with the following statement: The author or authors of this code dedicate any and all copyright interest in this code to the public domain. We make this dedication for the benefit of the public at large and to the detriment of our heirs and successors. We intend this dedication to be an overt act of relinquishment in perpetuity of all present and future rights this code under copyright law.\
We are not able to accept patches or changes to SQLite that are not accompanied by a statement such as the above. In addition, if you make changes or enhancements as an employee, then a simple statement such as the above is insufficient. You must also send by surface mail a copyright release signed by a company officer. A signed original of the copyright release should be mailed to: Hwaci, 6200 Maple Cove Lane, Charlotte, NC 28269, USA\
A template copyright release is available in PDF or HTML. You can use this release to make future changes.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b IBM Corporation ( BSD kernel )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1987 IBM Corporation. All rights reserved.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of IBM not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.\
IBM DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL IBM BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b IBM Corporation ( ICU - International Components for Unicode )\

\b0 ICU License - ICU 1.8.1 and later\
COPYRIGHT AND PERMISSION NOTICE\
Copyright \'a9 1995-2015 International Business Machines Corporation and others. All rights reserved.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, provided that the above copyright notice(s) and this permission notice appear in all copies of the Software and that both the above copyright notice(s) and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR HOLDERS INCLUDED IN THIS NOTICE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, OR ANY SPECIAL INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of a copyright holder shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization of the copyright holder.\
All trademarks and registered trademarks mentioned herein are the property of their respective owners.\
Third-Party Software Licenses\
This section contains third-party software notices and/or additional terms for licensed third-party software components included within ICU libraries.\
1. Unicode Data Files and Software\
COPYRIGHT AND PERMISSION NOTICE\
Copyright \'a9 1991-2015 Unicode, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Distributed under the Terms of Use in http://www.unicode.org/copyright.html.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of the Unicode data files and any associated documentation (the "Data Files") or Unicode software and any associated documentation (the "Software") to deal in the Data Files or Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies of the Data Files or Software, and to permit persons to whom the Data Files or Software are furnished to do so, provided that\
(a) this copyright and permission notice appear with all copies of the Data Files or Software,\
(b) this copyright and permission notice appear in associated documentation, and\
(c) there is clear notice in each modified Data File or in the Software as well as in the documentation associated with the Data File(s) or Software that the data or software has been modified.\
THE DATA FILES AND SOFTWARE ARE PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR HOLDERS INCLUDED IN THIS NOTICE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, OR ANY SPECIAL INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THE DATA FILES OR SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of a copyright holder shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in these Data Files or Software without prior written authorization of the copyright holder.\
2. Chinese/Japanese Word Break Dictionary Data (cjdict.txt)\
The Google Chrome software developed by Google is licensed under the BSD license. Other software included in this distribution is provided under other licenses, as set forth below.\
The BSD License\
http://opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license.php \
Copyright \'a9 2006-2008, Google Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of  Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
The word list in cjdict.txt are generated by combining three word lists listed below with further processing for compound word breaking. The frequency is generated with an iterative training against Google web corpora. \
* Libtabe (Chinese)\
- https://sourceforge.net/project/?group_id=1519\
- Its license terms and conditions are shown below.\
* IPADIC (Japanese)\
- http://chasen.aist-nara.ac.jp/chasen/distribution.html\
- Its license terms and conditions are shown below.\
---------COPYING.libtabe ---- BEGIN--------------------\
Copyright \'a9 1999 TaBE Project.\
Copyright \'a9 1999 Pai-Hsiang Hsiao. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
. Neither the name of the TaBE Project nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, DIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Copyright \'a9 1999 Computer Systems and Communication Lab, Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
. Neither the name of the Computer Systems and Communication Lab nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Copyright 1996 Chih-Hao Tsai @ Beckman Institute, University of Illinois\
c-tsai4@uiuc.edu  http://casper.beckman.uiuc.edu/~c-tsai4\
---------------COPYING.libtabe-----END------------------------------------\
---------------COPYING.ipadic-----BEGIN------------------------------------\
Copyright 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 Nara Institute of Science and Technology.  All Rights Reserved.\
Use, reproduction, and distribution of this software is permitted. Any copy of this software, whether in its original form or modified, must include both the above copyright notice and the following paragraphs.\
Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NAIST), the copyright holders, disclaims all warranties with regard to this software, including all implied warranties of merchantability and fitness, in no event shall NAIST be liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or profits, whether in an action of contract, negligence or other tortuous action, arising out of or in connection with the use or performance of this software.\
A large portion of the dictionary entries originate from ICOT Free Software.  The following conditions for ICOT Free Software applies to the current dictionary as well.\
Each User may also freely distribute the Program, whether in its original form or modified, to any third party or parties, PROVIDED that the provisions of Section 3 ("NO WARRANTY") will ALWAYS appear on, or be attached to, the Program, which is distributed substantially in the same form as set out herein and that such intended distribution, if actually made, will neither violate or otherwise contravene any of the laws and regulations of the countries having jurisdiction over the User or the intended distribution itself.\
NO WARRANTY\
The program was produced on an experimental basis in the course of the research and development conducted during the project and is provided to users as so produced on an experimental basis.  Accordingly, the program is provided without any warranty whatsoever, whether express, implied, statutory or otherwise.  The term "warranty" used herein includes, but is not limited to, any warranty of the quality, performance, merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose of the program and the nonexistence of any infringement or violation of any right of any third party.\
Each user of the program will agree and understand, and be deemed to have agreed and understood, that there is no warranty whatsoever for the program and, accordingly, the entire risk arising from or otherwise connected with the program is assumed by the user.\
Therefore, neither ICOT, the copyright holder, or any other organization that participated in or was otherwise related to the development of the program and their respective officials, directors, officers and other employees shall be held liable for any and all damages, including, without limitation, general, special, incidental and consequential damages, arising out of or otherwise in connection with the use or inability to use the program or any product, material or result produced or otherwise obtained by using the program, regardless of whether they have been advised of, or otherwise had knowledge of, the possibility of such damages at any time during the project or thereafter.  Each user will be deemed to have agreed to the foregoing by his or her commencement of use of the program.  The term "use" as used herein includes, but is not limited to, the use, modification, copying and distribution of the program and the production of secondary products from the program.\
In the case where the program, whether in its original form or modified, was distributed or delivered to or received by a user from any person, organization or entity other than ICOT, unless it makes or grants independently of ICOT any specific warranty to the user in writing, such person, organization or entity, will also be exempted from and not be held liable to the user for any such damages as noted above as far as the program is concerned.\
---------------COPYING.ipadic-----END------------------------------------\
3. Lao Word Break Dictionary Data (laodict.txt)\
Copyright \'a9 2013 International Business Machines Corporation and others. All Rights Reserved.\
Project:    http://code.google.com/p/lao-dictionary/\
Dictionary: http://lao-dictionary.googlecode.com/git/Lao-Dictionary.txt\
License:    http://lao-dictionary.googlecode.com/git/Lao-Dictionary-LICENSE.txt (copied below)\
This file is derived from the above dictionary, with slight modifications.\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
Copyright \'a9 2013 Brian Eugene Wilson, Robert Martin Campbell. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
4. Burmese Word Break Dictionary Data (burmesedict.txt)\
Copyright \'a9 2014 International Business Machines Corporation and others. All Rights Reserved.\
This list is part of a project hosted at:  github.com/kanyawtech/myanmar-karen-word-lists\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
Copyright \'a9 2013, LeRoy Benjamin Sharon. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name Myanmar Karen Word Lists, nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
5. Time Zone Database\
ICU uses the public domain data and code derived from Time Zone Database for its time zone support. The ownership of the TZ database is explained in BCP 175: Procedure for Maintaining the Time Zone Database section 7.\
7.  Database Ownership\
The TZ database itself is not an IETF Contribution or an IETF document.  Rather it is a pre-existing and regularly updated work that is in the public domain, and is intended to remain in the public domain.  Therefore, BCPs 78 [RFC5378] and 79 [RFC3979] do not apply to the TZ Database or contributions that individuals make to it. Should any claims be made and substantiated against the TZ Database, the organization that is providing the IANA Considerations defined in this RFC, under the memorandum of understanding with the IETF, currently ICANN, may act in accordance with all competent court orders.  No ownership claims will be made by ICANN or the IETF Trust on the database or the code.  Any person making a contribution to the database or code waives all rights to future claims in that contribution or in the TZ Database.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b iGLU Authors ( iGLU )\

\b0 iGLU is based on the GLU source included with Mesa_ 7.2, which in turn derives from the `SGI OpenGL Sample Implementation`__.  All code derived from SGI's source is licensed under the `SGI Free Software License B`__ version 2.0. All other code is licensed under the `MIT license`__.\
SGI FREE SOFTWARE LICENSE B (Version 2.0, Sept. 18, 2008)\
Copyright (C) 1991-2000 Silicon Graphics, Inc. All Rights Reserved.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice including the dates of first publication and either this permission notice or a reference to http://oss.sgi.com/projects/FreeB/ shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL SILICON GRAPHICS, INC. BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of Silicon Graphics, Inc. shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization from Silicon Graphics, Inc.\
The MIT License (MIT)\
Copyright (c) <year> <copyright holders> [Apple note:  The copyright year and holders were not indicated by the software author(s).]\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Intel Corporation ( BSD kernel )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1988, 1989 by Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, California. All rights reserved.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appears in all copies and that both the copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of Intel not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.\
INTEL DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL INTEL BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE, OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Intel Corporation ( Intel Threading Building Blocks )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2005-2017 Intel Corporation\
Apache License Version 2.0, January 2004 http://www.apache.org/licenses/ [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Intel Corporation et al. ( OpenCV library )\

\b0 Intel License Agreement For Open Source Computer Vision Library\
Copyright \'a9 2000, Intel Corporation, all rights reserved. Third party copyrights are property of their respective owners.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistribution's of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistribution's in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* The name of Intel Corporation may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
This software is provided by the copyright holders and contributors "as is" and any express or implied warranties, including, but not limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose are disclaimed. In no event shall the Intel Corporation or contributors be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, exemplary, or consequential damages (including, but not limited to, procurement of substitute goods or services; loss of use, data, or profits; or business interruption) however caused and on any theory of liability, whether in contract, strict liability, or tort (including negligence or otherwise) arising in any way out of the use of this software, even if advised of the possibility of such damage.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Internet Software Consortium ( BIND )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2004, 2005 internet Software Consortium, Inc. ("ISC")\
Copyright \'a9 1996-2003 by Internet Software Consortium.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS AND ISC DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL ISC BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Internet Systems Consortium ( iscdhcp )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2004-2010 by Internet Systems Consortium, Inc. ("ISC")\
Copyright \'a9 1995-2003 by Internet Software Consortium\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND ISC DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. \'a0IN NO EVENT SHALL ISC BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Angus Johnson ( Clipper )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2010-2014 Angus Johnson\
Boost Software License - Version 1.0 - August 17th, 2003\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person or organization obtaining a copy of the software and accompanying documentation covered by this license (the "Software") to use, reproduce, display, distribute, execute, and transmit the Software, and to prepare derivative works of the Software, and to permit third-parties to whom the Software is furnished to do so, all subject to the following: \
The copyright notices in the Software and this entire statement, including the above license grant, this restriction and the following disclaimer, must be included in all copies of the Software, in whole or in part, and all derivative works of the Software, unless such copies or derivative works are solely in the form of machine-executable object code generated by a source language processor. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR ANYONE DISTRIBUTING THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 JSON.org ( JSON parser )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2005 JSON.org\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
The Software shall be used for Good, not Evil.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Niels Lohmann ( JSON for Modern C++ )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 MIT License \
Copyright \'a9 2013-2017 Niels Lohmann\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Charles Karney ( GeographicLib )\

\b0 This license applies to GeographicLib, versions 1.12 and later.\
Copyright \'a9 2008-2012, Charles Karney\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the \'93Software\'94), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \'93AS IS\'94, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Tim Kientzle ( libarchive )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The libarchive distribution as a whole is Copyright by Tim Kientzle and is subject to the copyright notice reproduced at the bottom of this file.\
Each individual file in this distribution should have a clear copyright/licensing statement at the beginning of the file.  If any do not, please let me know and I will rectify it.  The following is intended to summarize the copyright status of the individual files; the actual statements in the files are controlling.\
* Except as listed below, all C sources (including .c and .h files) and documentation files are subject to the copyright notice reproduced at the bottom of this file.\
* The following source files are also subject in whole or in part to a 3-clause UC Regents copyright; please read the individual source files for details:\
   libarchive/archive_entry.c\
   libarchive/archive_read_support_filter_compress.c\
   libarchive/archive_write_set_filter_compress.c\
   libarchive/mtree.5\
   tar/matching.c\
* The following source files are in the public domain:\
   tar/getdate.c\
* The build files---including Makefiles, configure scripts, and auxiliary scripts used as part of the compile process---have widely varying licensing terms.  Please check individual files before distributing them to see if those restrictions apply to you.\
I intend for all new source code to use the license below and hope over time to replace code with other licenses with new implementations that do use the license below.  The varying licensing of the build scripts seems to be an unavoidable mess.\
Copyright (c) 2003-2009 <author(s)>\
All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in this position and unchanged.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Ted Krovetz ( UMAC Message Authentication )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1999-2006 Ted Krovetz\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and with or without fee, is hereby granted provided that the above copyright notice appears in all copies and in supporting documentation, and that the name of the copyright holder not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.\
Gerard D.C. Kuiken and others ( hyph-utf8 )\
US English (hyph-en-us.tex): Copyright \'a9 1990, 2004, 2005 Gerard D.C. Kuiken. Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification, are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright notice and this notice are preserved.\
British English (hyph-en-gb.tex): Unlimited copying and redistribution of this file is permitted so long as the file is not modified in any way.\
Catalan (cahyph.tex):  Licensed under the LPPL (LaTeX Project Public License), found at http://www.latex-project.org/lppl/. You may obtain a complete, unmodified copy of all LPPL-licensed files at http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/help/Catalogue/entries/hyph-utf8.html.\
Croatian:  Copyright \'a9 1994, 1996, 2011 Igor Marinowski (marinowski at gmail.com). Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above. \
Danish (hyph-da.tex):  Copyright 1994 Frank Jensen (Frank.Jensen@hugin.com). Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above. \
Dutch (hyph-nl.tex):\'a0 Copyright \'a9 1996, Piet Tutelaers.\'a0 Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
Finnish (hyph-fi.tex):\'a0 Patterns may be freely distributed.\
French (hyph-fr.tex): This file is available for free and can used and redistributed as is for free. Modified versions should have another name.\
German (hyph-de-1996.tex): Copyright (C) 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011, 2012 Werner Lemberg <wl@gnu.org>. Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
Greek (elhyph-utf8): Copyright \'a9 2008-2011 Dimitrios Filippou. Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above. \
Hungarian (Huhyphn):  The Initial Developer of the Original Code is Bence Nagy (bence.nagy@gmail.com). Portions created by the Initial Developer are Copyright \'a9 2003 the Initial Developer. All Rights Reserved. MPL 1.1/GPL 2.0/LGPL 2.1 You may obtain a copy of the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 at http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/.\
Italian (hyph-it.tex): Copyright 2008-2011 Claudio Beccari. LGPL. [Apple note: For a copy of the GNU Library General Public License, please refer to the WebKit attribution, where a copy of the LGPL is included]\
Norwegian (hyph-no.tex):\'a0 Copyright (C) 2004, 2005 Rune Kleveland, Ole Michael Selberg. Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification is permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright notice and this notice are preserved.\
Polish (plhyph.tex):  Knuth License notice. This soft\'adware is copy\'adright and you are ex\'adplic\'aditly granted a li\'adcense which gives you, the user of the soft\'adware, le\'adgal per\'admis\'adsion to copy, dis\'adtribute and/or mod\'adify the soft\'adware, so long as if you mod\'adify the soft\'adware then it carry a dif\'adfer\'adent name from the orig\'adi\'adnal soft\'adware. \
Portuguese (hyph-pt.tex):\'a0 Copyright \'a9 1996 by\'a0 Pedro J. de Rezende (rezende@dcc.unicamp.br) and J.Joao Dias Almeida (jj@di.uminho.pt). Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
Romanian (rohyphen.tex):  Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above. \
Russian (hyph-ru.tex): Copyright 1999-2003 Alexander I. Lebedev <swan@scon155.phys.msu.su>. Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
Spanish (hyph-es.tex): Copyright \'a9 Javier Bezos 1993 1997. Copyright \'a9 Javier Bezos and CervanTeX 2001-2010. Some parts, Copyright \'a9 by Francesc Carmona. Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
Swedish (hyph-sv.tex): Copyright 1994 by Jan Michael Rynning. All rights reserved. Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
Turkish (hyph-tr.tex): Copyright (C) 1987 Pierre A. MacKay.\'a0 Copyright (C) 2008, 2011 TUG. Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above.\
Ukrainian:  Copyright \'a9 1998-2001 Maksym Polyakov.  Licensed under the LPPL. Please see notes above. \
L4 Kernel\
Karlsruhe University\
Copyright \'a9 2001, 2002, 2003, Karlsruhe University\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
National ICT Australia\
Copyright \'a9 2002-2006, National ICT Australia\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Open Kernel Labs, Inc., National ICT Australia\
Copyright \'a9 2007-2008, Open Kernel Labs, Inc.\
Copyright \'a9 2003-2006, National ICT Australia\
Australian Public Licence B (OZPLB)\
Version 1-0\
All rights reserved.\'a0\
Developed by: Embedded, Real-time and Operating Systems Program (ERTOS)\
National ICT Australia\
http://www.ertos.nicta.com.au\
Permission is granted by National ICT Australia, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and any associated documentation files (the "Software") to deal with the Software without restriction, including (without limitation) the rights to use, copy, modify, adapt, merge, publish, distribute, communicate to the public, sublicense, and/or sell, lend or rent out copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimers.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimers in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of National ICT Australia, nor the names of its contributors, may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this Software without specific prior written permission.\
EXCEPT AS EXPRESSLY STATED IN THIS LICENCE AND TO THE FULL EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS", AND NATIONAL ICT AUSTRALIA AND ITS CONTRIBUTORS MAKE NO REPRESENTATIONS, WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY REPRESENTATIONS, WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS REGARDING THE CONTENTS OR ACCURACY OF THE SOFTWARE, OR OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NONINFRINGEMENT, THE ABSENCE OF LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, OR THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT DISCOVERABLE. TO THE FULL EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, IN NO EVENT SHALL NATIONAL ICT AUSTRALIA OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE ON ANY LEGAL THEORY (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) FOR ANY CLAIM, LOSS, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, INCLUDING (WITHOUT LIMITATION) LOSS OF PRODUCTION OR OPERATION TIME, LOSS, DAMAGE OR CORRUPTION OF DATA OR RECORDS; OR LOSS OF ANTICIPATED SAVINGS, OPPORTUNITY, REVENUE, PROFIT OR GOODWILL, OR OTHER ECONOMIC LOSS; OR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR EXEMPLARY DAMAGES, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THIS LICENCE, THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OF OR OTHER DEALINGS WITH THE SOFTWARE, EVEN IF NATIONAL ICT AUSTRALIA OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS HAVE BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH CLAIM, LOSS, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY.\
If applicable legislation implies representations, warranties, or conditions, or imposes obligations or liability on National ICT Australia or one of its contributors in respect of the Software that cannot be wholly or partly excluded, restricted or modified, the liability of National ICT Australia or the contributor is limited, to the full extent permitted by the applicable legislation, at its option, to:\
a. in the case of goods, any one or more of the following:\
i. the replacement of the goods or the supply of equivalent goods;\
ii. the repair of the goods;\
iii. the payment of the cost of replacing the goods or of acquiring\
equivalent goods;\
iv. the payment of the cost of having the goods repaired; or\
b. in the case of services:\
i. the supplying of the services again; or\
ii. the payment of the cost of having the services supplied again.\
The construction, validity and performance of this licence is governed by the laws in force in New South Wales, Australia.\
University of New South Wales\
Copyright \'a9 1995-2004, University of New South Wales\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Peter Anvin (muldi3.c)\
Copyright \'a9 Peter Anvin\'a0\
arch/arm/libgcc/__muldi3.c\
Peter Anvin <hpa@zytor.com>\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
Any copyright notice(s) and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
Todd C. Miller (strlcat.c)\
Copyright \'a9 1998 Todd C. Miller <Todd.Miller@courtesan.com>\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
Regents of the University of California (string.h)\
Copyright \'a9 1990 The Regents of the University of California\'a0\
All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Matteo Landi et al. ( netmap )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2012-2014 Matteo Landi, Luigi Rizzo, Giuseppe Lettieri. All rights reserved.\
Copyright \'a9 2013-2014 Universita` di Pisa. All rights reserved.\
Copyright \'a9 2014 Vincenzo Maffione. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS \'93AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Thomas G. Lane ( JPEG library )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1991-1998 Thomas G. Lane. All rights reserved except as specified below.\
The authors make NO WARRANTY or representation, either express or implied, with respect to this software, its quality, accuracy, merchantability, or fitness for a particular purpose. This software is provided AS IS, and you, its user, assume the entire risk as to its quality and accuracy. Permission is hereby granted to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software (or portions thereof) for any purpose, without fee, subject to these conditions: (1) If any part of the source code for this software is distributed, then this README file must be included, with this copyright and no-warranty notice unaltered; and any additions, deletions, or changes to the original files must be clearly indicated in accompanying documentation. (2) If only executable code is distributed, then the accompanying documentation must state that this software is based in part on the work of the Independent JPEG Group. (3) Permission for use of this software is granted only if the user accepts full responsibility for any undesirable consequences; the authors accept NO LIABILITY for damages of any kind. These conditions apply to any software derived from or based on the IJG code, not just to the unmodified library. If you use our work, you ought to acknowledge us. Permission is NOT granted for the use of any IJG author's name or company name in advertising or publicity relating to this software or products derived from it. This software may be referred to only as the Independent JPEG Group's software. We specifically permit and encourage the use of this software as the basis of commercial products, provided that all warranty or liability claims are assumed by the product vendor.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Ville Lauikari (TRE)\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2001-2009 Ville Laurikari <vl@iki.fi> All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics, Inc. ( TIFF library )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1988-1996 Sam Leffler. Copyright \'a9 1991-1996 Silicon Graphics, Inc.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS-IS AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\'a0\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Libfixmath Contributors ( libfixmath )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright (c) 2012 libfixmath contributors (see http://code.google.com/p/libfixmath/people/list)\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b The LIBLINEAR Project ( LIBLINEAR )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2007-2015 The LIBLINEAR Project. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither name of copyright holders nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.\'a0 IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Lukens Liu ( Mobile Lucene )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 Lukens Liu\
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License\'94); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.  [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Lukens Liu ( ObjCLucene )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The MIT License (MIT)\
Copyright \'a9 2015 Lukhnos Liu\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Niels Lohmann ( JSON library )\

\b0 The library is licensed under the MIT License  <http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT>:\
Copyright \'a9 2013-2016 Niels Lohmann\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Lua.org, PUC-Rio ( Lua )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1994\'962011 Lua.org, PUC-Rio\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Lucasfilm Ltd. ( Alembic )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 TM & \'a9 2009-2013 Lucasfilm Entertainment Company Ltd. or Lucasfilm Ltd. All rights reserved.\
Industrial Light & Magic, ILM and the Bulb and Gear design logo are all registered trademarks or service marks of Lucasfilm Ltd.\
\'a9 2009-2013 Sony Pictures Imageworks Inc.  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of Industrial Light & Magic nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
ALEMBIC ATTACHMENT A \'97 REQUIRED NOTICES FOR DISTRIBUTION\
The Alembic Software is distributed along with certain third party components licensed under various open source software licenses ("Open Source Components"). In addition to the warranty disclaimers contained in the open source licenses found below, Industrial Light & Magic, a division of Lucasfilm Entertainment Company Ltd. ("ILM") makes the following disclaimers regarding the Open Source Components on behalf of itself, the copyright holders, contributors, and licensors of such Open Source Components: \
TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED UNDER APPLICABLE LAW, THE OPEN SOURCE COMPONENTS ARE PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS, CONTRIBUTORS, LICENSORS, AND ILM "AS IS" AND ANY REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, WHETHER ORAL OR WRITTEN, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED, OR ARISING BY STATUTE, CUSTOM, COURSE OF DEALING, OR TRADE USAGE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, AND NON-INFRINGEMENT, ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT WILL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER, CONTRIBUTORS, LICENSORS, OR ILM AND/OR ITS AFFILIATES BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION), HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THE OPEN SOURCE COMPONENTS, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. \
Boost C++ Libraries \
------------------------------------------------------------------------ \
Boost Software License \'96 Version 1.0 August 17th, 2003 Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person or organization obtaining a copy of the software and accompanying documentation covered by this license (the "Software") to use, reproduce, display, distribute, execute, and transmit the Software, and to prepare derivative works of the Software, and to permit third-parties to whom the Software is furnished to do so, all subject to the following: \
The copyright notices in the Software and this entire statement, including the above license grant, this restriction and the following disclaimer, must be included in all copies of the Software, in whole or in part, and all derivative works of the Software, unless such copies or derivative works are solely in the form of machine-executable object code generated by a source language processor. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR ANYONE DISTRIBUTING THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE. \
MurmurHash3 \
------------------------------------------------------------------------  \
The MIT License (MIT) \
Copyright (c) <year> <copyright holders> \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Lucent Technologies ( dtoa.cpp )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1991, 2000, 2001 by Lucent Technologies. The author of this software is David M. Gay.\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose without fee is hereby granted, provided that this entire notice is included in all copies of any software which is or includes a copy or modification of this software and in all copies of the supporting documentation for such software.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTY. IN PARTICULAR, NEITHER THE AUTHOR NOR LUCENT MAKES ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE MERCHANTABILITY OF THIS SOFTWARE OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 K. K. Luke and May L.Y. Wong ( Hong Kong Cantonese Corpus )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 These are the transcriptions of the Hong Kong Cantonese Corpus (HKCanCor) created by Luke Kang Kwong <kkluke@ntu.edu.sg>. They are released under a CC BY license. If you use them, please cite: K. K. Luke and May L.Y. Wong (2015) The Hong Kong Cantonese Corpus: Design and Uses Journal of Chinese Linguistics (to appear). \
They are released under a CC BY license. <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode> \
You are free to: Share copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format Adapt remix, transform, and build upon the material for any purpose, even commercially. The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms. Under the following terms: Attribution You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use. No additional restrictions  You may not apply legal terms or Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Public License By exercising the Licensed Rights (defined below), You accept and agree to be bound by the terms and conditions of this Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Public License ("Public License"). To the extent this Public License may be interpreted as a contract, You are granted the Licensed Rights in consideration of Your acceptance of these terms and conditions, and the Licensor grants You such rights in consideration of benefits the Licensor receives from making the Licensed Material available under these terms and conditions. \
Section 1  Definitions. Adapted Material means material subject to Copyright and Similar Rights that is derived from or based upon the Licensed Material and in which the Licensed Material is translated, altered, arranged, transformed, or otherwise modified in a manner requiring permission under the Copyright and Similar Rights held by the Licensor. For purposes of this Public License, where the Licensed Material is a musical work, performance, or sound recording, Adapted Material is always produced where the Licensed Material is synched in timed relation with a moving image. Adapter's License means the license You apply to Your Copyright and Similar Rights in Your contributions to Adapted Material in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Public License. Copyright and Similar Rights means copyright and/or similar rights closely related to copyright including, without limitation, performance, broadcast, sound recording, and Sui Generis Database Rights, without regard to how the rights are labeled or categorized. For purposes of this Public License, the rights specified in Section 2(b)(1)-(2) are not Copyright and Similar Rights. Effective Technological Measures means those measures that, in the absence of proper authority, may not be circumvented under laws fulfilling obligations under Article 11 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty adopted on December 20, 1996, and/or similar international agreements. Exceptions and Limitations means fair use, fair dealing, and/or any other exception or limitation to Copyright and Similar Rights that applies to Your use of the Licensed Material. Licensed Material means the artistic or literary work, database, or other material to which the Licensor applied this Public License. Licensed Rights means the rights granted to You subject to the terms and conditions of this Public License, which are limited to all Copyright and Similar Rights that apply to Your use of the Licensed Material and that the Licensor has authority to license. Licensor means the individual(s) or entity(ies) granting rights under this Public License. Share means to provide material to the public by any means or process that requires permission under the Licensed Rights, such as reproduction, public display, public performance, distribution, dissemination, communication, or importation, and to make material available to the public including in ways that members of the public may access the material from a place and at a time individually chosen by them. Sui Generis Database Rights means rights other than copyright resulting from Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases, as amended and/or succeeded, as well as other essentially equivalent rights anywhere in the world. You means the individual or entity exercising the Licensed Rights under this Public License. Your has a corresponding meaning. \
Section 2  Scope. License grant. Subject to the terms and conditions of this Public License, the Licensor hereby grants You a worldwide, royalty-free, non-sublicensable, non-exclusive, irrevocable license to exercise the Licensed Rights in the Licensed Material to: reproduce and Share the Licensed Material, in whole or in part; and produce, reproduce, and Share Adapted Material. Exceptions and Limitations. For the avoidance of doubt, where Exceptions and Limitations apply to Your use, this Public License does not apply, and You do not need to comply with its terms and conditions. Term. The term of this Public License is specified in Section 6(a). Media and formats; technical modifications allowed. The Licensor authorizes You to exercise the Licensed Rights in all media and formats whether now known or hereafter created, and to make technical modifications necessary to do so. The Licensor waives and/or agrees not to assert any right or authority to forbid You from making technical modifications necessary to exercise the Licensed Rights, including technical modifications necessary to circumvent Effective Technological Measures. For purposes of this Public License, simply making modifications authorized by this Section 2(a)(4) never produces Adapted Material. Downstream recipients. Offer from the Licensor  Licensed Material. Every recipient of the Licensed Material automatically receives an offer from the Licensor to exercise the Licensed Rights under the terms and conditions of this Public License. No downstream restrictions. You may not offer or impose any additional or different terms or conditions on, or apply any Effective Technological Measures to, the Licensed Material if doing so restricts exercise of the Licensed Rights by any recipient of the Licensed Material. No endorsement. Nothing in this Public License constitutes or may be construed as permission to assert or imply that You are, or that Your use of the Licensed Material is, connected with, or sponsored, endorsed, or granted official status by, the Licensor or others designated to receive attribution as provided in Section 3(a)(1)(A)(i). Other rights. Moral rights, such as the right of integrity, are not licensed under this Public License, nor are publicity, privacy, and/or other similar personality rights; however, to the extent possible, the Licensor waives and/or agrees not to assert any such rights held by the Licensor to the limited extent necessary to allow You to exercise the Licensed Rights, but not otherwise. Patent and trademark rights are not licensed under this Public License. To the extent possible, the Licensor waives any right to collect royalties from You for the exercise of the Licensed Rights, whether directly or through a collecting society under any voluntary or waivable statutory or compulsory licensing scheme. In all other cases the Licensor expressly reserves any right to collect such royalties. \
Section 3  License Conditions. Your exercise of the Licensed Rights is expressly made subject to the following conditions. Attribution. If You Share the Licensed Material (including in modified form), You must: retain the following if it is supplied by the Licensor with the Licensed Material: identification of the creator(s) of the Licensed Material and any others designated to receive attribution, in any reasonable manner requested by the Licensor (including by pseudonym if designated); a copyright notice; a notice that refers to this Public License; a notice that refers to the disclaimer of warranties; a URI or hyperlink to the Licensed Material to the extent reasonably practicable; indicate if You modified the Licensed Material and retain an indication of any previous modifications; and indicate the Licensed Material is licensed under this Public License, and include the text of, or the URI or hyperlink to, this Public License. You may satisfy the conditions in Section 3(a)(1) in any reasonable manner based on the medium, means, and context in which You Share the Licensed Material. For example, it may be reasonable to satisfy the conditions by providing a URI or hyperlink to a resource that includes the required information. If requested by the Licensor, You must remove any of the information required by Section 3(a)(1)(A) to the extent reasonably practicable. If You Share Adapted Material You produce, the Adapter's License You apply must not prevent recipients of the Adapted Material from complying with this Public License. \
Section 4  Sui Generis Database Rights. Where the Licensed Rights include Sui Generis Database Rights that apply to Your use of the Licensed Material: for the avoidance of doubt, Section 2(a)(1) grants You the right to extract, reuse, reproduce, and Share all or a substantial portion of the contents of the database; if You include all or a substantial portion of the database contents in a database in which You have Sui Generis Database Rights, then the database in which You have Sui Generis Database Rights (but not its individual contents) is Adapted Material; and You must comply with the conditions in Section 3(a) if You Share all or a substantial portion of the contents of the database. For the avoidance of doubt, this Section 4 supplements and does not replace Your obligations under this Public License where the Licensed Rights include other Copyright and Similar Rights. \
Section 5  Disclaimer of Warranties and Limitation of Liability. Unless otherwise separately undertaken by the Licensor, to the extent possible, the Licensor offers the Licensed Material as-is and as-available, and makes no representations or warranties of any kind concerning the Licensed Material, whether express, implied, statutory, or other. This includes, without limitation, warranties of title, merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, non-infringement, absence of latent or other defects, accuracy, or the presence or absence of errors, whether or not known or discoverable. Where disclaimers of warranties are not allowed in full or in part, this disclaimer may not apply to You. To the extent possible, in no event will the Licensor be liable to You on any legal theory (including, without limitation, negligence) or otherwise for any direct, special, indirect, incidental, consequential, punitive, exemplary, or other losses, costs, expenses, or damages arising out of this Public License or use of the Licensed Material, even if the Licensor has been advised of the possibility of such losses, costs, expenses, or damages. Where a limitation of liability is not allowed in full or in part, this limitation may not apply to You. The disclaimer of warranties and limitation of liability provided above shall be interpreted in a manner that, to the extent possible, most closely approximates an absolute disclaimer and waiver of all liability. \
Section 6  Term and Termination. This Public License applies for the term of the Copyright and Similar Rights licensed here. However, if You fail to comply with this Public License, then Your rights under this Public License terminate automatically. Where Your right to use the Licensed Material has terminated under Section 6(a), it reinstates: automatically as of the date the violation is cured, provided it is cured within 30 days of Your discovery of the violation; or upon express reinstatement by the Licensor. For the avoidance of doubt, this Section 6(b) does not affect any right the Licensor may have to seek remedies for Your violations of this Public License. For the avoidance of doubt, the Licensor may also offer the Licensed Material under separate terms or conditions or stop distributing the Licensed Material at any time; however, doing so will not terminate this Public License. Sections 1, 5, 6, 7, and 8 survive termination of this Public License. \
Section 7  Other Terms and Conditions. The Licensor shall not be bound by any additional or different terms or conditions communicated by You unless expressly agreed. Any arrangements, understandings, or agreements regarding the Licensed Material not stated herein are separate from and independent of the terms and conditions of this Public License. \
Section 8  Interpretation. For the avoidance of doubt, this Public License does not, and shall not be interpreted to, reduce, limit, restrict, or impose conditions on any use of the Licensed Material that could lawfully be made without permission under this Public License. To the extent possible, if any provision of this Public License is deemed unenforceable, it shall be automatically reformed to the minimum extent necessary to make it enforceable. If the provision cannot be reformed, it shall be severed from this Public License without affecting the enforceability of the remaining terms and conditions. No term or condition of this Public License will be waived and no failure to comply consented to unless expressly agreed to by the Licensor. Nothing in this Public License constitutes or may be interpreted as a limitation upon, or waiver of, any privileges and immunities that apply to the Licensor or You, including from the legal processes of any jurisdiction or authority. Creative Commons is not a party to its public licenses. Notwithstanding, Creative Commons may elect to apply one of its public licenses to material it publishes and in those instances will be considered the Licensor. The text of the Creative Commons public licenses is dedicated to the public domain under the CC0 Public Domain Dedication. Except for the limited purpose of indicating that material is shared under a Creative Commons public license or as otherwise permitted by the Creative Commons policies published at creativecommons.org/policies, Creative Commons does not authorize the use of the trademark Creative Commons or any other trademark or logo of Creative Commons without its prior written consent including, without limitation, in connection with any unauthorized modifications to any of its public licenses or any other arrangements, understandings, or agreements concerning use of licensed material. For the avoidance of doubt, this paragraph does not form part of the public licenses. Creative Commons may be contacted at creativecommons.org. technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the license permits.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Jouni Malinen ( hostapd )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2002-2010, Jouni Malinen <j@w1.fi> and contributors.\
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as published by the Free Software Foundation. See COPYING for more details. Alternatively, this software may be distributed, used, and modified under the terms of BSD license. See README for more details. [Apple note: Use and redistribution is under the terms of the BSD license]\
Jouni Malinen ( WPA Supplicant / UNIX domain socket -based control interface )\
Copyright \'a9 2004-2005, Jouni Malinen jkmaline@cc.hut.fi - See README and COPYING for more details.\
Copyright \'a9 2005-2006, Jouni Malinen <j@w1.fi>\
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as published by the Free Software Foundation.\
Alternatively, this software may be distributed under the terms of BSD license.\
See README and COPYING for more details. [Apple note: Use and redistribution is under the terms of the BSD license]\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( Ares, BSD Operating System, install-sh, Kerberos, WebDAV )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1985-1999 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.\
Export of this software from the United States of America may require a specific license from the United States Government. It is the responsibility of any person or organization contemplating export to obtain such a license before exporting. WITHIN THAT CONSTRAINT, permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of M.I.T. not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission. M.I.T. makes no representations about the suitability of this software for any purpose. It is provided as is without express or implied warranty.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY M.I.T. AS-IS. M.I.T. DISCLAIMS ALL EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES WITH REGARDS TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. IN NO EVENT SHALL M.I.T. BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Stephen L. Moshier ( cephes math library )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1984, 1987, 1989 by Stephen L. Moshier.\'a0Used with permission of the author.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 National Institutes for the Humanities ( Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2011 National Institutes for the Humanities. All rights reserved.\
Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese, also known as BCCWJ, was developed by the National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics. Used with copyright owner's permission.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 PJ Naughter ( AA+ )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2003 - 2012 by PJ Naughter (Web: www.naughter.com, Email: pjna@naughter.com)\
All rights reserved.\
Copyright / Usage Details:\
You are allowed to include the source code in any product (commercial, shareware, freeware or otherwise) when your product is released in binary form. You are allowed to modify the source code in any way you want except you cannot modify the copyright details at the top of each module. If you want to distribute source code with your application, then you are only allowed to distribute versions released by the author. This is to maintain a single distribution point for the source code.\'a0\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 NECTEC ( LEXiTRON Thai-English Electronic Dictionary )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright (c)  2003 National Electronics and Computer Technology Center (NECTEC). All rights reserved.\
LICENSE AGREEMENT\
License agreement (LA) is a legal agreement between you and NECTEC. Please read it carefully before redistribution, reproduction or downloading \
from LEXiTRON services. This license agreement consists of the above copyright notice, definitions, the acceptance of license agreement, terms \
of use, and disclaimer information. In addition, it provides warranty information, specific terms and conditions that depart from other "free" softwares and "open source" softwares.\
1. Definitions\
(a)"NECTEC" refers to National Electronics and Computer Technology Center which is an organization under National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Ministry of Science and Technology.\
(b)"LEXiTRON" refers to a dictionary software and data developed by the Information Research and Development Division, NECTEC, including other software and data released by NECTEC.\
(c)"Services" refer to any supplies for accessing to a variety of resources, including tools, downloading, communication and collected information,  and also any update, enhancement, new features, and/or the addition of any new Web property.\
(d)"Terms of Use" or "TOU" refers to terms and conditions for utilizing LEXiTRON.\
(e)"You" refers to any end users and/or government and private contributors who download  program and data from LEXiTRON website in order to reproduce, redistribute and update content, material, or any products corresponding to LEXiTRON.\
(f)"Source Code" refers to program instructions written as an text file; must be translated by a compiler or interpreter or assembler into binary form for a particular \
computer before execution.\
(g)"Binary Form" refers to the machine-language output of a compiler that is ready for execution on a particular computer.\
2. Acceptance of License Agreement\
NECTEC reserves the right to update the license agreement at any time without prior notice.\
3. Terms of Use\
Redistribution and use in source and binary form, with or without modification, are permitted provided that all of the following conditions are met:\
(a)Redistribution of source code must retain the above copyright notice, Acceptance of License Agreement , TOU, and the disclaimer in section 4.\
(b)Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, the acceptance of terms, TOU, and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or \
other materials provided with the redistribution.\
(c)Any product, created and redistributed by you, which is composed of any part from LEXiTRON must include the following acknowledgement:  \
"This product is created by the adaptation of LEXiTRON developed by NECTEC (http://www.nectec.or.th/)." \
(d)Products derived from the adaptation of LEXiTRON must not be called "LEXiTRON", nor may "LEXiTRON" appear in their name, without prior written permission of NECTEC.\
(e)You must not use "LEXiTRON" in a manner likely to cause any damage to NECTEC or third person. NECTEC shall reserve our rights to demand any compensation, retaining fee, costs of action and execution, and expenses occured out of such manner.\
(f)Neither the name of the National Electronics and Computer Technology Center (NECTEC) / National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA) nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote product derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
4. Disclaimer of Warranty\
LEXiTRON, INFORMATION, CONTENT, MATERIAL, OR PRODUCT PROVIDED OR RELEASED BY NECTEC ARE THE COPYRIGHTED WORK OF NECTEC. MOREOVER, LEXiTRON, INFORMATION, CONTENT, MATERIAL, OR PRODUCT PROVIDED OR RELEASED BY NECTEC AND CONTRIBUTORS ARE ALSO ON AN "AS IS" AND "AS AVAILABLE" BASIS. ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL NECTEC OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THE SOFTWARE, INFORMATION CONTENT, MATERIAL, OR PRODUCT, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 NetBSD ( BSD Operating System )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 This product contains software provided by The NetBSD Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Netscape Communications Corporation ( arena files; parser )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1998-2000 Netscape Communications Corporation.\
For WebCore/platform/Arena.[h|cpp], other contributors are: Nick Blievers <nickb@adacel.com.au>; Jeff Hostetler <jeff@nerdone.com>; Tom Rini <trini@kernel.crashing.org>; Raffaele Sena <raff@netwinder.org.\
For WebCore/rendering/RenderLayer.[h|cpp], other contributors are: Robert O'Callahan <roc+@cs.cmu.edu>; David Baron <dbaron@fas.harvard.edu>; Christian Biesinger <cbiesinger@web.de>; Randall Jesup <rjesup@wgate.com>; Roland Mainz <roland.mainz@informatik.med.uni-giessen.de>; Josh Soref <timeless@mac.com>; Boris Zbarsky <bzbarsky@mit.edu>.\
For WebCore/html/HTMLDocument.cpp, a contributors is: David Baron <dbaron@fas.harvard.edu>.\
This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2.1 of the License, http://www.fsf.org/copyleft/lesser.html, or (at your option) any later version.\
This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.\
You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.\
Alternatively, the contents of this file may be used under the terms of either the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1, found at http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/ (the "MPL") or the GNU General Public License Version 2.0, found at http://www.fsf.org/copyleft/gpl.html (the "GPL"), in which case the provisions of the MPL or the GPL are applicable instead of those above. If you wish to allow use of your version of this file only under the terms of one of those two licenses (the MPL or the GPL) and not to allow others to use your version of this file under the LGPL, indicate your decision by deleting the provisions above and replace them with the notice and other provisions required by the MPL or the GPL, as the case may be. If you do not delete the provisions above, a recipient may use your version of this file under any of the LGPL, the MPL or the GPL.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Netscape Communications Corporation ( NSS - Network Security Services )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1994-2000 Netscape Communications Corporation.\
The contents of this file are subject to the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 (the License); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/.\'a0 Software distributed under the License is distributed on an AS IS basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing rights and limitations under the License. The Original Code is the Netscape security libraries.\'a0 The Initial Developer of the Original Code is Netscape Communications Corporation.\'a0 Portions created by Netscape are Copyright \'a9 1994-2000 Netscape Communications Corporation.\'a0 All Rights Reserved.\
Alternatively, the contents of this file may be used under the terms of the GNU General Public License Version 2 or later (the GPL), in which case the provisions of the GPL are applicable instead of those above.\'a0 If you wish to allow use of your version of this file only under the terms of the GPL and not to allow others to use your version of this file under the MPL, indicate your decision by deleting the provisions above and replace them witfh the notice and other provisions required by the GPL.\'a0 If you do not delete the provisions above, a recipient may use your version of this file under either the MPL or the GPL.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Netscape Communications Corporation ( SpiderMonkey, as used in DateMath.cpp )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 SpiderMonkey: Copyright \'a9 1998 Netscape Communications Corporation\
DateMath.cpp: Copyright \'a9 1999-2000 Harri Porten <porten@kde.org>; Copyright \'a9 2006, 2007 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.\
Version: MPL 1.1/GPL 2.0/LGPL 2.1\
The contents of this file are subject to the Mozilla Public License Version 1.1 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License a http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/\
Software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing rights and limitations under the License.\
The Original Code is Mozilla Communicator client code, released March 31, 1998.\'a0\
The Initial Developer of the Original Code is Netscape Communications Corporation. Portions created by the Initial Developer are Copyright \'a9 1998 the Initial Developer. All Rights Reserved.\
Alternatively, the contents of this file may be used under the terms of either of the GNU General Public License Version 2 or later (the "GPL"), or the GNU Lesser General Public License Version 2.1 or later (the "LGPL"), in which case the provisions of the GPL or the LGPL are applicable instead of those above. If you wish to allow use of your version of this file only under the terms of either the GPL or the LGPL, and not to allow others to use your version of this file under the terms of the MPL, indicate your decision by deleting the provisions above and replace them with the notice and other provisions required by the GPL or the LGPL. If you do not delete the provisions above, a recipient may use your version of this file under the terms of any one of the MPL, the GPL or the LGPL.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b NTT, Taku Kudo ( MeCab )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2001-2006 Taku Kudo, Copyright \'a9 2005-2006 Nippon\'a0\
Telegraph and Telephone Corporation. All rights reserved.\'a0\
MeCab is copyrighted free software by Taku Kudo\'a0\
<taku@chasen.org> and Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation.\'a0\
You can redistribute it and/or modify it under either the terms of the GPL (see the file GPL), LGPL (see the file LGPL), or the conditions below:\'a0\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\'a0\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\'a0\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THISEVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b OpenBSD ( BSD Operating System, OpenSSH )\

\b0 This product contains software provided by OpenBSD and its contributors.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b The OpenLDAP Foundation ( OpenLDAP )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1998-2008 The OpenLDAP Foundation. All rights reserved.\
The OpenLDAP Public License, Version 2.8, August 2003\
Redistribution and use of this software and associated documentation ("Software"), with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions in source form must retain copyright statements and notices, 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce applicable copyright statements and notices, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution, and 3. Redistributions must contain a verbatim copy of this document.\
The OpenLDAP Foundation may revise this license from time to time. Each revision is distinguished by a version number. You may use this Software under terms of this license revision or under the terms of any subsequent revision of the license.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OPENLDAP FOUNDATION AND ITS CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OPENLDAP FOUNDATION, ITS CONTRIBUTORS, OR THE AUTHOR(S) OR OWNER(S) OF THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
The names of the authors and copyright holders must not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealing in this Software without specific, written prior permission. Title to copyright in this Software shall at all times remain with copyright holders. OpenLDAP is a registered trademark of the OpenLDAP Foundation.\
Copyright 1999-2003 The OpenLDAP Foundation, Redwood City, California, USA. All Rights Reserved. Permission to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this document is granted.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b The OpenSSL Project ( OpenSSL )\

\b0 LICENSE ISSUES\
==============\
The OpenSSL toolkit stays under a dual license, i.e. both the conditions of the OpenSSL License and the original SSLeay license apply to the toolkit. See below for the actual license texts. Actually both licenses are BSD-style Open Source licenses. In case of any license issues related to OpenSSL please contact openssl-core@openssl.org.\
OpenSSL License\
---------------\
Copyright \'a9 1998-2003 The OpenSSL Project. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgment: "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. For written permission, please contact openssl-core@openssl.org. 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL" nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written permission of the OpenSSL Project. 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following acknowledgment: "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
This product includes cryptographic software written by Eric Young (eay@cryptsoft.com). This product includes software written by Tim Hudson (tjh@cryptsoft.com).\
Original SSLeay License\
--------------------\
Copyright \'a9 1995-1998 Eric Young (eay@cryptsoft.com). All rights reserved.\
This package is an SSL implementation written by Eric Young (eay@cryptsoft.com). The implementation was written so as to conform with Netscape's SSL.\
This library is free for commercial and non-commercial use as long as the following conditions are adhered to. The following conditions apply to all code found in this distribution, be it the RC4, RSA, lhash, DES, etc., code; not just the SSL code. The SSL documentation included with this distribution is covered by the same copyright terms except that the holder is Tim Hudson (tjh@cryptsoft.com).\
Copyright remains Eric Young's, and as such any Copyright notices in the code are not to be removed. If this package is used in a product, Eric Young should be given attribution as the author of the parts of the library used. This can be in the form of a textual message at program startup or in documentation (online or textual) provided with the package.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: "This product includes cryptographic software written by Eric Young (eay@cryptsoft.com)." The word 'cryptographic' can be left out if the routines from the library being used are not cryptographic related. 4. If you include any Windows specific code (or a derivative thereof) from the apps directory (application code) you must include an acknowledgement: "This product includes software written by Tim Hudson (tjh@cryptsoft.com)."\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY ERIC YOUNG ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
The license and distribution terms for any publicly available version or derivative of this code cannot be changed. i.e. this code cannot simply be copied and put under another distribution license [including the GNU Public License.]\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Open Software Foundation, et al. ( Distributed Computing Environment 1.1 )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1989 OPEN SOFTWARE FOUNDATION, INC., Copyright \'a9 1989 HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY, Copyright \'a9 1989 DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORPORATION.\
To anyone who acknowledges that this file is provided "AS IS" without any express or implied warranty: permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this file for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided that the above copyright notices and this notice appears in all source code copies, and that none of the names of Open Software Foundation, Inc., Hewlett-Packard Company, or Digital Equipment Corporation be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission. Neither Open Software Foundation, Inc., Hewlett-Packard Company, nor Digital Equipment Corporation makes any representations about the suitability of this software for any purpose.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Open Software Foundation ( Mach Operating System )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1995, 1994, 1993, 1992, 1991, 1990 Open Software Foundation, Inc.\'a0\
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appears in all copies and that both the copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of (OSF) or Open Software Foundation not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.\
OSF DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. IN NO EVENT SHALL OSF BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE, OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 OpenTaal et al. ( OpenTaal )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2006-2010 OpenTaal, \'a9 2001-2005 Simon Brouwer e.a.,\'a9 1996 Nederlandstalige Tex Gebruikersgroep\
[ENGLISH] You are kindly requested to read this file "license_en_EN.txt" and to keep a copy of it with every copy you make of this language file. 1. Name: Dutch word list for spell checking - OpenTaal 2. Version of words list: 2.10G; version of spell checking: 2.10G. 3. Requirements: Hunspell 1.2.8 and higher 4. Spelling Seal of Dutch Language Union: The OpenTaal list of lemmas has received the Spelling Seal of Approval from the Dutch Language Union, the formal Dutch language institute. For more information please see: http://www.taalunieversum.org/keurmerk/ 5. Copyrights: \'c3\'c2\'a9 2006-2010 OpenTaal, \'c3\'c2\'a9 2001-2005 Simon Brouwer e.a., \'c3\'c2\'a9 1996 Nederlandstalige Tex Gebruikersgroep 6. Licenses: OpenTaal aims to create and publish free Dutch language files. To enable the broadest (re)use the language files are freely available under the below, liberal licenses at the discretion of the user. We strongly recommend to read the applicable license before usage. A. BSD (revised version): - Full license text: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BSD/legalcode - Summary: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BSD/deed.en B. Creative Commons, Attribution 3.0 (unported) - Full license text: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode - Summary: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/deed.en 7. Support OpenTaal: OpenTaal is a non-profit volunteer project. With your (small) financial support OpenTaal will further expand its activities and enhance its professionalism. Your donation is welcome at account number: 15.62.32.782, BIC: RABONL2U, IBAN: NL88RABO0156232782 of Stichting OpenTaal / OpenTaal Foundation. In the Netherlands your donations are tax deductible. OpenTaal Foundation has been designated by the Dutch Tax Administration as an Institution for General Benefit (algemeen nut beogende instelling or ANBI). Please see: http://belastingdienst.nl/anbi/ 8. Participate: Everyone is welcome to participate. Please give feedback, discuss on the mailing list or run Harvester. By contributing to the project you agree that your contribution is available under free or/open source licenses. In case you wish, your name will be mentioned on the website. Your are invited to send us your written request. 9. Rights of third parties: OpenTaal respects the rights of third parties and aims to keep its data freely available. Therefore you may no use protected sources of third parties, i.e. dictionaries, without their permission when you contribute to the project. It is permitted to use the materials of the Dutch Language Union, i.e. their spelling instruction and word list. In case you believe OpenTaal is violating your rights, we ask you to send us a written notice as soon as possible. 10.Contact: OpenTaal Foundation, http://www.opentaal.org, bestuur@opentaal.org ________________________________________________________________ [NEDERLANDS] U wordt vriendelijk verzocht om dit bestand ("licentie_nl_NL.txt") te lezen en mee te leveren bij iedere kopie van dit taalhulpbestand. 1. Naam: Nederlandstalige woordenlijst voor spellingcontrole - OpenTaal 2. Versie woordenlijst: 2.10G; versie spellingcontrole: 2.10G 3. Vereisten: Hunspell 1.2.8 en hoger 4. Keurmerk Spelling Nederlandse Taalunie: De lijst met basiswoorden van OpenTaal draagt het keurmerk van de Nederlandse Taalunie. Voor meer informatie zie: http://www.taalunieversum.org/keurmerk 5. Auteursrechten: \'c3\'c2\'a9 2006-2010 OpenTaal, \'c3\'c2\'a9 2001-2005 Simon Brouwer e.a., \'c3\'c2\'a9 1996 Nederlandstalige Tex Gebruikersgroep 6. Licenties: OpenTaal heeft als doel om vrij beschikbare Nederlandstalige taalhulpbestanden te ontwikkelen en te verspreiden. Om breed (her)gebruik mogelijk te maken zijn de taalhulpbestanden gratis beschikbaar onder de twee onderstaande, liberale licenties naar keuze van de gebruiker. U wordt ten zeerste aangeraden om voorafgaand aan het gebruik kennis te nemen van de toepasselijke licentie. A. BSD (herziene versie): - Volledige licentie: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BSD/legalcode - Samenvatting: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BSD/deed.nl B. Creative Commons, Naamsvermelding 3.0 (unported) - Volledige licentie: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode - Samenvatting: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/deed.nl 7. Steun OpenTaal: OpenTaal is een vrijwilligersproject zonder winstoogmerk. Door uw (kleine) financi\'c3\'c2\'able steun kan OpenTaal meer activiteiten ontplooien en het project professionaliseren. Uw donatie is van harte welkom op rekeningnummer 15.62.32.782 t.n.v. Stichting OpenTaal. Uw giften zijn aftrekbaar van de belasting. Stichting OpenTaal is namelijk door de Belastingdienst erkend als ANBI, oftewel "Algemeen Nut Beogende Instelling". Zie: http://belastingdienst.nl/anbi/ 8. Meedoen: Iedereen is welkom om mee te doen. Meld fouten, discussieer mee op de mailinglijst of draai Harvester. Door bij te dragen aan het project stemt u ermee in dat uw bijdrage aan het desbetreffende taalhulpbestand beschikbaar komt onder vrije en/of opensource licenties. Indien u dat wenst, dan kan uw naam op de website genoemd worden. We ontvangen uw schriftelijk verzoek daarvoor graag. 9. Rechten van derden: OpenTaal respecteert de rechten van derden en wil haar gegevens vrij beschikbaar houden. Voor bijdragen aan het project mag u daarom niet zonder toestemming gebruikmaken van beschermde naslagwerken, zoals woordenboeken. Wel is het toegestaan om gebruik te maken van de materialen van de Nederlandse Taalunie, zoals de leidraad en de woordenlijst. Indien u van mening bent dat OpenTaal inbreuk maakt op uw rechten, dan verzoeken we u hierover zo spoedig mogelijk schriftelijk contact met ons op te nemen. 10.Contact: Stichting OpenTaal, http://www.opentaal.org, bestuur@opentaal.org\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Oxford University Press, Inc. ( dictionary content )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 New Oxford American Dictionary \
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2017 by Oxford University Press, Inc. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford American Writer\'92s Thesaurus \
Copyright \'a9 2012, 2016 by Oxford University Press, Inc. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford Dictionary of English\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2017 by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford Thesaurus of English\
Copyright \'a9 2009, 2017 by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Politikens Nudansk Ordbog / Politikens Modern Danish Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2010 Politikens Forlagshus, under licence to Oxford University Press.  All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Prisma woordenboek Nederlands\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2013 Uitgeverij Unieboek | Het Spectrum bv, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Prisma Handwoordenboek Engels\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2013 Uitgeverij Unieboek | Het Spectrum bv, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Multidictionnaire de la langue fran\'e7aise\
Copyright \'a9 2012, 2014 Les \'c9ditions Qu\'e9bec Am\'e9rique Inc., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford-Hachette French Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2007, 2016 Oxford University Press and Hachette Livre.  All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
W\'f6rterbuchsubstanz aus: Duden - Wissensnetz deutsche Sprache\
Copyright \'a9 2011, 2013 Bibliographisches Institut GmbH, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford German Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2008, 2016 Oxford University Press.  All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f2 \cf0 \uc0\u2352 \u2366 \u2332 \u2346 \u2366 \u2354 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u2361 \u2367 \u2344 \u2381 \u2342 \u2368 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u2358 \u2348 \u2381 \u2342 \u2325 \u2379 \u2358 
\f0  / Rajpal Hindi Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2011 Rajpal & Sons, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Un dizionario italiano da un affiliato di Oxford University Press\
Copyright \'a9 2005, 2013 Mondadori Education S.p.A., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford Paravia Il Dizionario inglese - italiano/italiano - inglese / Oxford - Paravia Italian Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2016 Oxford-Paravia Italian Dictionary, Pearson Italia, Milano - Torino, and Oxford University Press.  All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f3 \cf0 \'a5\'b9\'a9\'60\'a5\'d1\'a9\'60\'b4\'f3\'b4\'c7\'c1\'d6
\f0  / Super Daijirin Japanese Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2013 Sanseido Co., Ltd., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\

\f3 \'a5\'a6\'a5\'a3\'a5\'ba\'a5\'c0\'a5\'e0\'d3\'a2\'ba\'cd\'b4\'c7\'b5\'e4
\f0  / The Wisdom English-Japanese Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2007, 2013 Sanseido Company Ltd., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\

\f3 \'a5\'a6\'a5\'a3\'a5\'ba\'a5\'c0\'a5\'e0\'ba\'cd\'d3\'a2\'b4\'c7\'b5\'e4
\f0  / The Wisdom Japanese-English Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2007, 2013 Sanseido Company Ltd., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f4 \cf0 \'b4\'ba\'bf\'a1\'c0\'cc\'bd\'ba
\f0  
\f4 \'b1\'b9\'be\'ee\'bb\'e7\'c0\'fc
\f0  / New Ace Korean Language Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2012 DIOTEK, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\

\f4 \'b4\'ba\'bf\'a1\'c0\'cc\'bd\'ba
\f0  
\f4 \'bf\'b5\'c7\'d1\'bb\'e7\'c0\'fc
\f0  / New Ace English-Korean Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2011, 2014 DIOTEK Co., Ltd., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\

\f4 \'b4\'ba\'bf\'a1\'c0\'cc\'bd\'ba
\f0  
\f4 \'c7\'d1\'bf\'b5\'bb\'e7\'c0\'fc
\f0  / New Ace Korean-English Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2011, 2014 DIOTEK Co., Ltd., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Norsk Ordbok / Norwegian Monolingual Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2012, 2014 Kunnskapsforlaget ANS, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Dicion\'e1rio de Portugu\'eas licenciado para Oxford University Press\
Copyright \'a9 2012 Editora Objetiva, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford Portuguese Dictionary \
Copyright \'a9 2015, 2016 by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\uc0\u1057 . \u1048 . \u1054 \u1078 \u1077 \u1075 \u1086 \u1074  \'ab\u1058 \u1086 \u1083 \u1082 \u1086 \u1074 \u1099 \u1081  \u1089 \u1083 \u1086 \u1074 \u1072 \u1088 \u1100  \u1088 \u1091 \u1089 \u1089 \u1082 \u1086 \u1075 \u1086  \u1103 \u1079 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \'bb  / S.I. Ojegov: Explanatory Dictionary of the Russian Language\
Copyright \'a9 2012 "Universe and Education" Publishing House Ltd., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Oxford Russian Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2000, 2016 by Oxford University Press.  All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f3 \cf0 \'cf\'d6\'b4\'fa\'ba\'ba\'d3\'ef\'b9\'e6\'b7\'b6\'b4\'ca\'b5\'e4
\f0  / The Standard Dictionary of Contemporary Chinese\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2013 Oxford University Press and Foreign Language Teaching and Research Publishing, Co., Ltd. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\

\f3 \'c5\'a3\'bd\'f2\'d3\'a2\'ba\'ba\'ba\'ba\'d3\'a2\'b4\'ca\'b5\'e4
\f0  / Oxford Chinese Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2010, 2016 Oxford University Press and Foreign Language Teaching and Research Publishing Co., Ltd. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Diccionario General de la Lengua Espa\'f1ola Vox\
Copyright \'a9 2012, 2013 Larousse Editorial, S.L., under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
Gran Diccionario Oxford - Espa\'f1ol-Ingl\'e9s \'95 Ingl\'e9s-Espa\'f1ol / Oxford Spanish Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2008, 2016 Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
NE Ordbok / NE Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2013 Nationalencyklopedin, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f5 \cf0 \'be\'a8\'b9\'d2\'b9\'d8\'a1\'c3\'c1\'e4\'b7\'c2
\f0  
\f5 \'a9\'ba\'d1\'ba\'b7\'d1\'b9\'ca\'c1\'d1\'c2\'e1\'c5\'d0\'ca\'c1\'ba\'d9\'c3\'b3\'ec
\f0  / Complete Thai Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 2009 Se-Education PLC, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f3 \cf0 \'ce\'e5\'c4\'cf\'87\'f8\'d5\'5a\'bb\'ee\'d3\'c3\'de\'6f\'b5\'e4
\f0  / Wu-Nan Chinese Dictionary\
Copyright \'a9 1987, 2015 Wu-Nan Book Inc. under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. \
-------------------------------\
Arkada\uc0\u351  T\'fcrk\'e7e S\'f6zl\'fck\
Copyright \'a9 2012 Arkada\uc0\u351  Publishing LTD, under licence to Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.\
-------------------------------\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Mike Pall ( LuaJIT )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2005-2015 Mike Pall. All rights reserved.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Paratype Ltd ( PT Mono Font, PT Serif Font )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright (c) 2009, ParaType Ltd. All Rights Reserved.\
LICENSING AGREEMENT for the fonts with Original Name: PT Sans, PT Serif, PT Mono. Version 1.3 - January 20, 2012\
GRANT OF LICENSE\uc0\u8232 ParaType Ltd grants you the right to use, copy, modify the fonts and distribute modified and unmodified copies of the fonts by any means, including placing on Web servers for free downloading, embedding in documents and Web pages, bundling with commercial and non commercial products, if it does not conflict with the conditions listed below:\
- You may bundle the font with commercial software, but you may not sell the fonts by themselves. They are free.\
- You may distribute the fonts in modified or unmodified version only together with this Licensing Agreement and with above copyright notice. You have no right to modify the text of Licensing Agreement. It can be placed in a separate text file or inserted into the font file, but it must be easily viewed by users.\
- You may not distribute modified version of the font under the Original name or a combination of Original name with any other words without explicit written permission from ParaType.\
TERMINATION & TERRITORY\uc0\u8232 This license has no limits on time and territory, but it becomes null and void if any of the above conditions are not met.\
DISCLAIMER\uc0\u8232 THE FONT SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT, PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR OTHER RIGHT. IN NO EVENT SHALL PARATYPE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE FONT SOFTWARE OR FROM OTHER DEALINGS IN THE FONT SOFTWARE.\
ParaType Ltd http://www.paratype.ru\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Colin Percival ( bsdiff )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright 2003-2005 Colin Percival. All rights reserved\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted providing that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.\'a0 IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Pham Kim Long ( UniKey Vietnamese Input Method )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2006 Pham Kim Long.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Pixar ( OpenSubdiv )\

\b0 Copyright 2013 Pixar\
Modified Apache 2.0 License\
TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR USE, REPRODUCTION, AND DISTRIBUTION\
1. Definitions.\
"License" shall mean the terms and conditions for use, reproduction, and distribution as defined by Sections 1 through 9 of this document.\
"Licensor" shall mean the copyright owner or entity authorized by the copyright owner that is granting the License.\
"Legal Entity" shall mean the union of the acting entity and all other entities that control, are controlled by, or are under common control with that entity. For the purposes of this definition, "control" means (i) the power, direct or indirect, to cause the direction or management of such entity, whether by contract or otherwise, or (ii) ownership of fifty percent (50%) or more of the outstanding shares, or (iii) beneficial ownership of such entity.\
"You" (or "Your") shall mean an individual or Legal Entity exercising permissions granted by this License.\
"Source" form shall mean the preferred form for making modifications, including but not limited to software source code, documentation source, and configuration files.\
"Object" form shall mean any form resulting from mechanical transformation or translation of a Source form, including but not limited to compiled object code, generated documentation, and conversions to other media types.\
"Work" shall mean the work of authorship, whether in Source or Object form, made available under the License, as indicated by a copyright notice that is included in or attached to the work (an example is provided in the Appendix below).\
"Derivative Works" shall mean any work, whether in Source or Object form, that is based on (or derived from) the Work and for which the editorial revisions, annotations, elaborations, or other modifications represent, as a whole, an original work of authorship. For the purposes of this License, Derivative Works shall not include works that remain separable from, or merely link (or bind by name) to the interfaces of, the Work and Derivative Works thereof.\
"Contribution" shall mean any work of authorship, including the original version of the Work and any modifications or additions to that Work or Derivative Works thereof, that is intentionally submitted to Licensor for inclusion in the Work by the copyright owner or by an individual or Legal Entity authorized to submit on behalf of the copyright owner. For the purposes of this definition, "submitted" means any form of electronic, verbal, or written communication sent to the Licensor or its representatives, including but not limited to communication on electronic mailing lists, source code control systems, and issue tracking systems that are managed by, or on behalf of, the Licensor for the purpose of discussing and improving the Work, but excluding communication that is conspicuously marked or otherwise designated in writing by the copyright owner as "Not a Contribution."\
"Contributor" shall mean Licensor and any individual or Legal Entity on behalf of whom a Contribution has been received by Licensor and subsequently incorporated within the Work.\
2. Grant of Copyright License. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, each Contributor hereby grants to You a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable copyright license to reproduce, prepare Derivative Works of, publicly display, publicly perform, sublicense, and distribute the Work and such Derivative Works in Source or Object form.\
3. Grant of Patent License. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, each Contributor hereby grants to You a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable (except as stated in this section) patent license to make, have made, use, offer to sell, sell, import, and otherwise transfer the Work, where such license applies only to those patent claims licensable by such Contributor that are necessarily infringed by their Contribution(s) alone or by combination of their Contribution(s) with the Work to which such Contribution(s) was submitted. If You institute patent litigation against any entity (including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that the Work or a Contribution incorporated within the Work constitutes direct or contributory patent infringement, then any patent licenses granted to You under this License for that Work shall terminate as of the date such litigation is filed.\
4. Redistribution. You may reproduce and distribute copies of the Work or Derivative Works thereof in any medium, with or without modifications, and in Source or Object form, provided that You meet the following conditions:\
(a) You must give any other recipients of the Work or Derivative Works a copy of this License; and\
(b) You must cause any modified files to carry prominent notices stating that You changed the files; and\
(c) You must retain, in the Source form of any Derivative Works that You distribute, all copyright, patent, trademark, and attribution notices from the Source form of the Work, excluding those notices that do not pertain to any part of the Derivative Works; and\
(d) If the Work includes a "NOTICE" text file as part of its distribution, then any Derivative Works that You distribute must include a readable copy of the attribution notices contained within such NOTICE file, excluding those notices that do not pertain to any part of the Derivative Works, in at least one of the following places: within a NOTICE text file distributed as part of the Derivative Works; within the Source form or documentation, if provided along with the Derivative Works; or, within a display generated by the Derivative Works, if and wherever such third-party notices normally appear. The contents of the NOTICE file are for informational purposes only and do not modify the License. You may add Your own attribution notices within Derivative Works that You distribute, alongside or as an addendum to the NOTICE text from the Work, provided that such additional attribution notices cannot be construed as modifying the License. You may add Your own copyright statement to Your modifications and may provide additional or different license terms and conditions for use, reproduction, or distribution of Your modifications, or for any such Derivative Works as a whole, provided Your use, reproduction, and distribution of the Work otherwise complies with the conditions stated in this License.\
5. Submission of Contributions. Unless You explicitly state otherwise, any Contribution intentionally submitted for inclusion in the Work by You to the Licensor shall be under the terms and conditions of this License, without any additional terms or conditions. Notwithstanding the above, nothing herein shall supersede or modify the terms of any separate license agreement you may have executed with Licensor regarding such Contributions.\
6. Trademarks. This License does not grant permission to use the trade names, trademarks, service marks, or product names of the Licensor and its affiliates, except as required to comply with Section 4(c) of the License and to reproduce the content of the NOTICE file.\
7. Disclaimer of Warranty. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, Licensor provides the Work (and each Contributor provides its Contributions) on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied, including, without limitation, any warranties or conditions of TITLE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY, or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. You are solely responsible for determining the appropriateness of using or redistributing the Work and assume any risks associated with Your exercise of permissions under this License.\
8. Limitation of Liability. In no event and under no legal theory, whether in tort (including negligence), contract, or otherwise, unless required by applicable law (such as deliberate and grossly negligent acts) or agreed to in writing, shall any Contributor be liable to You for damages, including any direct, indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages of any character arising as a result of this License or out of the use or inability to use the Work (including but not limited to damages for loss of goodwill, work stoppage, computer failure or malfunction, or any and all other commercial damages or losses), even if such Contributor has been advised of the possibility of such damages.\
9. Accepting Warranty or Additional Liability. While redistributing the Work or Derivative Works thereof, You may choose to offer, and charge a fee for, acceptance of support, warranty, indemnity, or other liability obligations and/or rights consistent with this License. However, in accepting such obligations, You may act only on Your own behalf and on Your sole responsibility, not on behalf of any other Contributor, and only if You agree to indemnify, defend, and hold each Contributor harmless for any liability incurred by, or claims asserted against, such Contributor by reason of your accepting any such warranty or additional liability.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Pixar, et al. ( tif_pixarfilm.c )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1988, 1990 by Sam Leffler. Copyright \'a9 1992 by Pixar. All rights reserved.\
This file is provided for unrestricted use provided that this legend is included on all tape media and as a part of the software program in whole or part.\'a0 Users may copy, modify or distribute this file at will.\
TIFF Library.\'a0 Modified Rev 5.0 Lempel-Ziv & Welch Compression for film output.\
This code is derived from Sam Leffler's TIFF LZW code which was derived from the compress program whose code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by James A. Woods, derived from original work by Spencer Thomas and Joseph Orost.\
The original Berkeley copyright notice appears at the end in its entirety.\
Copyright \'a9 1985, 1986 The Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved.\
This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by James A. Woods, derived from original work by Spencer Thomas and Joseph Orost.\'a0 Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are duplicated in all such forms and that any documentation, advertising materials, and other materials related to such distribution and use acknowledge that the software was developed by the University of California, Berkeley.\'a0 The name of the University may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Dr. Martin Porter et al. ( Snowball Stemmer Data Set )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 All the software given out on this Snowball site is covered by the BSD License (see http://www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license.html ), with Copyright (c) 2001, Dr Martin Porter, and (for the Java developments) Copyright (c) 2002, Richard Boulton. Essentially, all this means is that you can do what you like with the code, except claim another Copyright for it, or claim that it is issued under a different license. The software is also issued without warranties, which means that if anyone suffers through its use, they cannot come back and sue you. You also have to alert anyone to whom you give the Snowball software to the fact that it is covered by the BSD license. We have not bothered to insert the licensing arrangement into the text of the Snowball software.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Glen Randers-Pehrson, et al. ( png )\

\b0 libpng version 1.0.8 - July 24, 2000\
Copyright \'a9 1998-2000 Glenn Randers-Pehrson, Copyright \'a9 1996, 1997 Andreas Dilger, Copyright \'a9 1995, 1996 Guy Eric Schalnat, Group 42, Inc.\
COPYRIGHT NOTICE, DISCLAIMER, and LICENSE:\'a0\
For the purposes of this copyright and license, Contributing Authors is defined as the following set of individuals: Andreas Dilger, Dave Martindale, Guy Eric Schalnat, Paul Schmidt, Tim Wegner.\
The PNG Reference Library is supplied AS IS. The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc. disclaim all warranties, expressed or implied including, without limitation, the warranties of merchantability and of fitness for any purpose. The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc. assume no liability for direct, indirect, incidental, special, exemplary, or consequential damages, which may result from the use of the PNG Reference Library, even if advised of the possibility of such damage.\
Permission is hereby granted to use, copy, modify, and distribute this source code, or portions hereof, for any purpose, without fee, subject to the following restrictions: 1. The origin of this source code must not be misrepresented. 2. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such and must not be misrepresented as being the original source. 3. This Copyright notice may not be removed or altered from any source or altered source distribution. The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc. specifically permit, without fee, and encourage the use of this source code as a component to supporting the PNG file format in commercial products. If you use this source code in a product, acknowledgment is not required but would be appreciated.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Rapptz and contributors ( Sol2 )\

\b0 The MIT License (MIT)\
Copyright \'a9 2013-2015 Rapptz and contributors\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Eric S. Raymond, Greshon Elber, Toshio Kuratomi ( giflib )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The GIFLIB distribution is Copyright \'a9 1997 Eric S. Raymond.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 RE2 Authors ( RE2 )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2009 The RE2 Authors. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT\
LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT\
OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT\
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE\
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Red Hat, Inc. ( Popt )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1998  Red Hat Software\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE X CONSORTIUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of the X Consortium shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization from the X Consortium.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Regents of the University of California ( Cubic TCP )\

\b0 Copyright Owner: Copyright (c) 1991-1997 Regents of the University of California. Copyright Publication Years: 1991-1997 Copyright (c) 1991-1997 Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved. Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: \
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. \
3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by the Computer Systems Engineering Group at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. \
4. Neither the name of the University nor of the Laboratory may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Regents of the University of California ( getopt )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1987-2002 The Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
A. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
B. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
C. Neither the names of the copyright holders nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Regents of the University of California ( lperf3 )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2009-2014, The Regents of the University of California, through Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (subject to receipt of any required approvals from the U.S. Dept. of Energy). All rights reserved. Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: \
(1) Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
(2) Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/ or other materials provided with the distribution. \
(3) Neither the name of the University of California, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, U.S. Dept. of Energy nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. \
You are under no obligation whatsoever to provide any bug fixes, patches, or upgrades to the features, functionality or performance of the source code ("Enhancements") to anyone; however, if you choose to make your Enhancements available either publicly, or directly to Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, without imposing a separate written license agreement for such Enhancements, then you hereby grant the following license: a non-exclusive, royalty-free perpetual license to install, use, modify, prepare derivative works, incorporate into other computer software, distribute, and sublicense such enhancements or derivative works thereof, in binary and source code form.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Davi de Castro Reis, Djamel Belazzougui, Fabiano Cupertino Botelho and Nivio Ziviani ( cmph )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright 2012, Davi de Castro Reis, Djamel Belazzougui, Fabiano Cupertino Botelho and Nivio Ziviani\'a0\
The code of the cmph library is dual licensed under the LGPL version 2 and MPL 1.1 licenses. Please refer to the LGPL-2 and MPL-1.1 files in the repository for the full description of each of the licenses. [Apple note: Use and redistribution is under the terms of the MPL 1.1 license]\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Michael Richardson, et al. ( FIPS-186-2 SHA1-based PRF )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 fips186prf.c An implementation of the FIPS-186-2 SHA1-based PRF.\
The development of the EAP/SIM support was funded by Internet Foundation Austria (http://www.nic.at/ipa).\
This code was written from scratch by Michael Richardson, and it is dual licensed under both GPL and BSD.\
GPL notice:\
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.\
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.\'a0\
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301, USA\'a0\
[Apple note: For a copy of the GNU General Public License, please refer to the Free Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the GPL is included]\
BSD notice:\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
Copyright \'a9 2003 Michael Richardson <mcr@sandelman.ottawa.on.ca>\
Copyright \'a9 2006 The FreeRADIUS server project\
SHA-1 in C\
By Steve Reid <steve@edmweb.com>\
100% Public Domain\
Julian R. Seward ( bzip2 )\
Copyright \'a9 1996-2002 Julian R Seward. All rights reserved. Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not claim that you wrote the original software. If you use this software in a product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be appreciated but is not required. 3. Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be misrepresented as being the original software. 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\'a0\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Julian Seward, Cambridge, UK. jseward@acm.org\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Luigi Rizzo, Alessandro Cerri, et al. ( if_llatbl.c )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2004 Luigi Rizzo, Alessandro Cerri. All rights reserved.\
Copyright \'a9 2004-2008 Qing Li. All rights reserved.\
Copyright \'a9 2008 Kip Macy. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\b Furuhashi Sadayuki ( msgpack-c )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2008-2015 FURUHASHI Sadayuki\
Boost Software License - Version 1.0 - August 17th, 2003\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person or organization obtaining a copy of the software and accompanying documentation covered by this license (the "Software") to use, reproduce, display, distribute, execute, and transmit the Software, and to prepare derivative works of the Software, and to permit third-parties to whom the Software is furnished to do so, all subject to the following:\
The copyright notices in the Software and this entire statement, including the above license grant, this restriction and the following disclaimer, must be included in all copies of the Software, in whole or in part, and all derivative works of the Software, unless such copies or derivative works are solely in the form of machine-executable object code generated by a source language processor.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR ANYONE DISTRIBUTING THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Mutsuo Saito, Makoto Matsumoto, and Hiroshima University ( Mersenne Twister )\uc0\u8232 
\b0 Copyright \'a9 2006, 2007, Mutsuo Saito, Makoto Matsumoto, and Hiroshima University. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\uc0\u8232 \'95 Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer.\
\'95 Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\uc0\u8232 \'95 Neither the name of the Hiroshima University nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS \'93AS IS,\'94 AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION), HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE), ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\

\b Toshinori Sato ( mecab-ipadic-NEologd )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2015-2016 Toshinori Sato (@overlast) \
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License\'94); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 softSurfer and Dan Sunday ( simple_Polygon() )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright 2001 softSurfer, 2012 Dan Sunday\
This code may be freely used and modified for any purpose providing that this copyright notice is included with it. SoftSurfer makes no warranty for this code, and cannot be held liable for any real or imagined damage resulting from its use. Users of this code must verify correctness for their application.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Sony Computer Entertainment ( OpenSteer )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2002-2003, Sony Computer Entertainment America\
Original author: Craig Reynolds <craig_reynolds@playstation.sony.com>\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Dimitrios Souflis ( Tiny Scheme )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2000, Dimitrios Souflis. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of Dimitrios Souflis nor the names of the contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Justin Spahr-Summers ( libextobjc ) \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 Justin Spahr-Summers\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Spotify AB ( Annoy )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2013 Spotify AB\
Apache License Version 2.0, January 2004 http://www.apache.org/licenses/ [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Tom St Denis ( LibTomCrypt )\

\b0 LibTomCrypt, modular cryptographic library -- Tom St Denis\
LibTomCrypt is a library that provides various cryptographic algorithms in a highly modular and flexible manner. The library is free for all purposes without any express guarantee it works\
Tom St Denis, tomstdenis@gmail.com, http://libtom.org\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 STI Pub Companies ( STIX Fonts Project )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2001-2010 by the STI Pub Companies, consisting of the American Institute of Physics, the American Chemical Society, the American Mathematical Society, the American Physical Society, Elsevier, Inc., and The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc. (www.stixfonts.org), with Reserved Font Name STIX Fonts, STIX Fonts (TM) is a  trademark of The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.      \
Portions copyright \'a9 1998-2003 by MicroPress, Inc. (www.micropress-inc.com), with Reserved Font Name TM Math. To obtain additional mathematical fonts, please contact MicroPress, Inc., 68-30 Harrow Street, Forest Hills, NY 11375, USA, Phone: (718) 575-1816. \
Portions copyright \'a9 1990 by Elsevier, Inc. \
This Font Software is licensed under the SIL Open Font License, Version 1.1. \
This license is copied below, and is also available with a FAQ at:  http://scripts.sil.org/OFL \
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- \
SIL OPEN FONT LICENSE Version 1.1 - 26 February 2007 \
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- \
PREAMBLE \
The goals of the Open Font License (OFL) are to stimulate worldwide development of collaborative font projects, to support the font creation efforts of academic and linguistic communities, and to provide a free and open framework in which fonts may be shared and improved in partnership with others. \
The OFL allows the licensed fonts to be used, studied, modified and redistributed freely as long as they are not sold by themselves. The fonts, including any derivative works, can be bundled, embedded, redistributed and/or sold with any software provided that any reserved names are not used by derivative works. The fonts and derivatives, however, cannot be released under any other type of license. The requirement for fonts to remain under this license does not apply to any document created using the fonts or their derivatives. \
DEFINITIONS \
"Font Software" refers to the set of files released by the Copyright Holder(s) under this license and clearly marked as such. This may include source files, build scripts and documentation. \
"Reserved Font Name" refers to any names specified as such after the copyright statement(s). \
"Original Version" refers to the collection of Font Software components as distributed by the Copyright Holder(s). \
"Modified Version" refers to any derivative made by adding to, deleting, or substituting -- in part or in whole -- any of the components of the Original Version, by changing formats or by porting the Font Software to a new environment. \
"Author" refers to any designer, engineer, programmer, technical writer or other person who contributed to the Font Software.\
PERMISSION & CONDITIONS \
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of the Font Software, to use, study, copy, merge, embed, modify, redistribute, and sell modified and unmodified copies of the Font Software, subject to the following conditions: \
1) Neither the Font Software nor any of its individual components, in Original or Modified Versions, may be sold by itself. \
2) Original or Modified Versions of the Font Software may be bundled, redistributed and/or sold with any software, provided that each copy contains the above copyright notice and this license. These can be included either as stand-alone text files, human-readable headers or in the appropriate machine-readable metadata fields within text or binary files as long as those fields can be easily viewed by the user. \
3) No Modified Version of the Font Software may use the Reserved Font Name(s) unless explicit written permission is granted by the corresponding Copyright Holder. This restriction only applies to the primary font name as presented to the users. \
4) The name(s) of the Copyright Holder(s) or the Author(s) of the Font Software shall not be used to promote, endorse or advertise any Modified Version, except to acknowledge the contribution(s) of the Copyright Holder(s) and the Author(s) or with their explicit written permission. \
5) The Font Software, modified or unmodified, in part or in whole, must be distributed entirely under this license, and must not be distributed under any other license. The requirement for fonts to remain under this license does not apply to any document created using the Font Software. \
TERMINATION \
This license becomes null and void if any of the above conditions are not met. \
DISCLAIMER \
THE FONT SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT, PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR OTHER RIGHT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE FONT SOFTWARE OR FROM OTHER DEALINGS IN THE FONT SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Sun Microsystems, Inc. ( fdlibm )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1993, 2004 by Sun Microsystems, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Developed at SunSoft, a Sun Microsystems, Inc. business. Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software is freely granted, provided that this notice is preserved.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Sun Microsystems ( libm )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1993 by Sun Microsystems, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Developed at SunPro, a Sun Microsystems, Inc. business. Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software is freely granted, provided that this notice is preserved.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Sun Microsystems ( Sun RPC )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Sun RPC is a product of Sun Microsystems, Inc. and is provided for unrestricted use provided that this legend is included on all tape media and as a part of the software program in whole or part.\'a0 Users may copy or modify Sun RPC without charge, but are not authorized to license or distribute it to anyone else except as part of a product or program developed by the user or with the express written consent of Sun Microsystems, Inc. Sun RPC is provided with no support and without any obligation on the part of Sun Microsystems, Inc. to assist in its use, correction, modification or enhancement.\
SUN RPC IS PROVIDED AS IS WITH NO WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND INCLUDING THE WARRANTIES OF DESIGN, MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR ARISING FROM A COURSE OF DEALING, USAGE OR TRADE PRACTICE. SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC. SHALL HAVE NO LIABILITY WITH RESPECT TO THE INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHTS, TRADE SECRETS OR ANY PATENTS BY SUN RPC OR ANY PART THEREOF.\
In no event will Sun Microsystems, Inc. be liable for any lost revenue or profits or other special, indirect and consequential damages, even if Sun has been advised of the possibility of such damages. Sun Microsystems, Inc. 2550 Garcia Avenue Mountain View, California\'a0 94043.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Zilong Tan ( fast-hash )\

\b0 The MIT License\
Copyright \'a9 2012 Zilong Tan (eric.zltan@gmail.com)\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Tencent ( RapidJSON )\

\b0 Tencent is pleased to support the open source community by making RapidJSON available. \
Copyright \'a9 2015 THL A29 Limited, a Tencent company, and Milo Yip.  All rights reserved.\
If you have downloaded a copy of the RapidJSON binary from Tencent, please note that the RapidJSON binary is licensed under the MIT License.\
If you have downloaded a copy of the RapidJSON source code from Tencent, please note that RapidJSON source code is licensed under the MIT License, except for the third-party components listed below which are subject to different license terms.  Your integration of RapidJSON into your own projects may require compliance with the MIT License, as well as the other licenses applicable to the third-party components included within RapidJSON. To avoid the problematic JSON license in your own projects, it's sufficient to exclude the bin/jsonchecker/ directory, as it's the only code under the JSON license.\
A copy of the MIT License is included in this file.\
Other dependencies and licenses:\
Open Source Software Licensed Under the BSD License:\
--------------------------------------------------------------------\
The msinttypes r29 \
Copyright \'a9 2006-2013 Alexander Chemeris . All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of  copyright holder nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Open Source Software Licensed Under the JSON License:\
--------------------------------------------------------------------\
json.org - Copyright \'a9 2002 JSON.org  All Rights Reserved.\
JSON_checker - Copyright \'a9 2002 JSON.org  All Rights Reserved.\
Terms of the JSON License:\
---------------------------------------------------\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
The Software shall be used for Good, not Evil.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
Terms of the MIT License:\
--------------------------------------------------------------------\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\uc0\u8232 \
( tr-spell )\
Apache License Version 2.0, January 2004 http://www.apache.org/licenses/ [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Theodore Ts'o ( libuuid )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1996, 1997 Theodore Ts'o.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, and the entire permission notice in its entirety, including the disclaimer of warranties. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, ALL OF WHICH ARE HEREBY DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Tatsuhiro Tsujikawa ( nghttp2 )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The MIT License\
Copyright \'a9 2012, 2014, 2015, 2016 Tatsuhiro Tsujikawa\
Copyright \'a9 2012, 2014, 2015, 2016 nghttp2 contributors\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Tatsuhiro Tsujikawa ( Spdylay )\

\b0 The MIT License\
Copyright \'a9 2012 Tatsuhiro Tsujikawa\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Unicode, Inc. ( cldr )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1991-2001 Unicode, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of the Unicode data files and any associated documentation (the "Data Files") or Unicode software and any associated documentation (the "Software") to deal in the Data Files or Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies of the Data Files or Software, and to permit persons to whom the Data Files or Software are furnished to do so, provided that (a) the above copyright notice(s) and this permission notice appear with all copies of the Data Files or Software, (b) both the above copyright notice(s) and this permission notice appear in associated documentation, and \'a9 there is clear notice in each modified Data File or in the Software as well as in the documentation associated with the Data File(s) or Software that the data or software has been modified.\
THE DATA FILES AND SOFTWARE ARE PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR HOLDERS INCLUDED IN THIS NOTICE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, OR ANY SPECIAL INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THE DATA FILES OR SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of a copyright holder shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in these Data Files or Software without prior written authorization of the copyright holder.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Unicode, Inc. ( ConvertUTF )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2001 Unicode, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Disclaimer: This source code is provided as is by Unicode, Inc. No claims are made as to fitness for any particular purpose. No warranties of any kind are expressed or implied. The recipient agrees to determine applicability of information provided. If this file has been purchased on magnetic or optical media from Unicode, Inc., the sole remedy for any claim will be exchange of defective media within 90 days of receipt.\
Limitations on Rights to Redistribute This Code: Unicode, Inc. hereby grants the right to freely use the information supplied in this file in the creation of products supporting the Unicode Standard, and to make copies of this file in any form for internal or external distribution as long as this notice remains attached.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research/Unidata ( wordexp(), wordfree() from LDM project )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1995-2002 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research/Unidata.\
Portions of this software were developed by the Unidata Program at the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research.\
Access and use of this software shall impose the following obligations and understandings on the user. The user is granted the right, without any fee or cost, to use, copy, modify, alter, enhance and distribute this software, and any derivative works thereof, and its supporting documentation for any purpose whatsoever, provided that this entire notice appears in all copies of the software, derivative works and supporting documentation.\'a0 Further, UCAR requests that the user credit UCAR/Unidata in any publications that result from the use of this software or in any product that includes this software. The names UCAR and/or Unidata, however, may not be used in any advertising or publicity to endorse or promote any products or commercial entity unless specific written permission is obtained from UCAR/Unidata. The user also understands that UCAR/Unidata is not obligated to provide the user with any support, consulting, training or assistance of any kind with regard to the use, operation and performance of this software nor to provide the user with any updates, revisions, new versions or "bug fixes."\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY UCAR/UNIDATA "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL UCAR/UNIDATA BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE ACCESS, USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b University of California, et. al. ( BSD Operating System )\

\b0 This product includes software developed by the University of California, Berkeley, and its contributors.\
Copyright \'a9 1980-1997 The Regents of the University of California.\
Copyright \'a9 1994 Ugen J.S.Antsilevich.\
Copyright \'a9 1998 Apple Computer, Inc.\
Copyright \'a9 1994 The Australian National University.\
Copyright \'a9 1986 by Robert V. Baron.\
Copyright \'a9 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996 Keith Bostic.\
Copyright \'a9 1993 Daniel Boulet.\
Copyright \'a9 1992, 1993 John Brezak.\
Copyright \'a9 1996 Charles D. Cranor and Washington University.\
Copyright \'a9 1994-1996 Cronyx Engineering Ltd.\
Copyright \'a9 1988, 1989 by Adam de Boor.\
Copyright \'a9 1992,1993 Theo de Raadt <deraadt@fsa.ca>.\
Copyright \'a9 1989 Stephen Deering.\
Copyright \'a9 1994 Christopher G. Demetriou.\
Copyright \'a9 1997,1998 Julian Elischer <julian@freebsd.org>.\
Copyright \'a9 1994, Simon J. Gerraty.\
Copyright \'a9 1995 Martin Husemann.\
Copyright \'a9 1994-97 Mats O Jansson <moj@stacken.kth.se>.\
Copyright \'a9 1993 by Thomas Koenig.\
Copyright \'a9 1993 by Adrian Mariano <adrian@cam.cornell.edu>.\
Copyright \'a9 1993 Andrew Moore, Talke Studio.\
Copyright \'a9 1992 Keith Muller.\
Copyright \'a9 1996 Alex Nash.\
Copyright \'a9 1988 Julian Onions <jpo@cs.nott.ac.uk>.\
Copyright \'a9 1995 Bill Paul <wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu>.\
Copyright \'a9 1993 David Parsons.\
Copyright \'a9 1990, 1992 Jan-Simon Pendry.\
Copyright \'a9 1995-1997 by Darren Reed.\
Copyright \'a9 1998 Luigi Rizzo.\
Copyright \'a9 1994-1996 Wolfram Schneider <wosch@FreeBSD.org>, Berlin.\
Copyright \'a9 1991, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 Wolfgang Solfrank.\
Copyright \'a9 1998 Brian Somers <brian@Awfulhak.org>.\
Copyright \'a9 1989 by Berkeley Softworks.\
Copyright \'a9 1996 Ignatios Souvatzis.\
Copyright \'a9 1992 Diomidis Spinellis.\
Copyright \'a9 1997 Jonathan Stone.\
Copyright \'a9 1985 Sun Microsystems, Inc.\
Copyright \'a9 1995, 1996 Matt Thomas <matt@3am-software.com>.\
Copyright \'a9 1997 Jason R. Thorpe.\
Copyright \'a9 1991, 1994 TooLs GmbH.\
Copyright \'a9 University of British Columbia, 1984.\
Copyright \'a9 1988, 1992 The University of Utah and the Center for Software Science (CSS).\
Copyright \'a9 UNIX System Laboratories, Inc.\
Copyright \'a9 1993, 1994 Winning Strategies, Inc.\
All rights reserved.\
This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by Adam S. Moskowitz of Menlo Consulting; Adam de Boor; Asa Romberger; Atsushi Murai (amurai@spec.co.jp); Barry Brachman; Bob Toxen; Brian Hirt.; Case Larsen; Chris Newcomb; Chris Torek; Christos Zoulas of Cornell University; Cimarron D. Taylor of the University of California, Berkeley; Darren F. Provine; Dave Taylor, of Intuitive Systems; Dave Yost; David Barto at Celerity Computer Corp.; David C. Elliott, of MIPS Computer Systems; David Goodenough; David Hitz of Auspex Systems, Inc.; Diomidis Spinellis of Imperial College, University of London; Donn Seeley at Berkeley Software Design, Inc.; Eamonn McManus of Trinity College Dublin; Ed James; Edward Sze-Tyan Wang; Edward Wang at The University of California, Berkeley; Guy Harris at Network Appliance Corp.; Henry Spencer of the University of Toronto; Herb Hasler and Rick Macklem at The University of Guelph; James A. Woods; James W. Williams of the University of Maryland and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center; Jan-Simon Pendry; Jef Poskanzer and Craig Leres of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory; Jerry Berkman; Jim Gillogly at The Rand Corporation; Jim R. Oldroyd at The Instruction Set and Keith Gabryelski at Commodore Business Machines; John B. Roll Jr.; Joseph Orost; Keith Muller of the University of California, San Diego and Lance Visser of Convex Computer Corporation; Ken Arnold; Ken Smith of The State University of New York at Buffalo; Kenneth Almquist; Kevin Fall; Kevin Ruddy; Kim Letkeman; Landon Curt Noll; Marciano Pitargue; Michael Fischbein; Michael Rendell of the Memorial University of Newfoundland; Michiro Hikida; Mike Hibler; Mike Muuss; Mike Olson; Muffy Barkocy; Ozan Yigit at York University; Pace Willisson (pace@blitz.com); Ralph Campbell; Rich $alz of BBN Inc.; Rick Adams; Rick Macklem at The University of Guelph; Robert Corbett; Robert Elz at The University of Melbourne; Robert Paul Corbett; Spencer Thomas; Stephen Deering of Stanford University; Steve Hayman of the Indiana University Computer Science Department; Sun Microsystems, Inc.; Symmetric Computer Systems; Timothy C. Stoehr; Tony Nardo of the Johns Hopkins University/Applied Physics Lab; and the Systems Programming Group of the University of Utah Computer Science Department; the UCLA Ficus project; the Laboratory for Computation Vision and the Computer Science Department of the the University of British Columbia and the Computer Science Department (IV) of the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany; Scooter Morris at Genentech Inc.; Chuck Karish of Mindcraft, Inc.; Mike Karels at Berkeley Software Design, Inc.\
The United States Government has rights in parts of this work pursuant to contract no. DE-AC03-76SF00098 between the United States Department of Energy and the University of California.\
Some code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by the Center for Software Science of the University of Utah Computer Science Department. CSS requests users of this software to return to css-dist@cs.utah.edu any improvements that they make and grant CSS redistribution rights.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software must display the following acknowledgement: This product includes software developed by the University of California, Berkeley and its contributors. 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b University of Cambridge ( PCRE )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1997-2005 University of Cambridge\
PCRE LICENCE\
PCRE is a library of functions to support regular expressions whose syntax and semantics are as close as possible to those of the Perl 5 language. Written by: Philip Hazel <ph10@cam.ac.uk> University of Cambridge Computing Service, Cambridge, England. Phone: +44 1223 334714.\
Copyright \'a9 1997-2005 University of Cambridge\
Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose on any computer system, and to redistribute it freely, subject to the following restrictions:\
1. This software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.\
2. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented, either by explicit claim or by omission. In practice, this means that if you use PCRE in software which you distribute to others, commercially or otherwise, you must put a sentence like this\
Regular expression support is provided by the PCRE library package, which is open source software, written by Philip Hazel, and copyright by the University of Cambridge, England.\
somewhere reasonably visible in your documentation and in any relevant files or online help data or similar. A reference to the ftp site for the source, that is, to ftp://ftp.csx.cam.ac.uk/pub/software/programming/pcre/ should also be given in the documentation.\
3. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be misrepresented as being the original software.\
4. If PCRE is embedded in any software that is released under the GNU General Purpose Licence (GPL), or Lesser General Purpose Licence (LGPL), then the terms of that licence shall supersede any condition above with which it is incompatible.\
The documentation for PCRE, supplied in the "doc" directory, is distributed under the same terms as the software itself.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b University of Illinois/NCSA, et al. (LLVM)\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2009-2011 University of Illinois/NCSA, et al.\
All rights reserved.\
Developed by:\
LLVM Team\
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign\
http://llvm.org\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal with the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,\
this list of conditions and the following disclaimers.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,\
this list of conditions and the following disclaimers in the\
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the names of the LLVM Team, University of Illinois at\
Urbana-Champaign, nor the names of its contributors may be used to\
endorse or promote products derived from this Software without specific\
prior written permission.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. \'a0IN NO EVENT SHALL THE CONTRIBUTORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS WITH THE SOFTWARE.\
Copyright \'a9 2009-2010 University of Illinois/NCSA, et al.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b University of Minnesota ( METIS )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1995-2013, Regents of the University of Minnesota\
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License. [Apple Note: For a copy of the Apache License Version 2.0, please refer to the Apache Software Foundation attribution, where a copy of the Apache license is included.]\
\uc0\u8232 
\b The University of Reading ( Adept )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2012-2015 The University of Reading\
Author: Robin Hogan <r.j.hogan@reading.ac.uk>\
This file is part of the Adept library.\
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License\'94); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.\
Adept is dual-licensed, which means that you may choose to be bound by either of the following licenses.\
The Apache License, Version 2.0. This is a permissive, free-software license that will be the choice for almost all users. It permits you to use and modify the library for any purpose, and to redistribute it under the same terms. Modified versions, or derivative works incorporating Adept, may be distributed in source or object form with a few restrictions that are stated in the license, but provided these conditions are met it may be incorporated into proprietary software.\
The ESA Software Community License (ESCL), Type 1. Recognising that Adept was written largely with funding from the European Space Agency, you may alternatively use the Type-1 ESCL. It is more restrictive than Apache 2.0 in that derivative works can only be released under the same license, and the license is limited to users in ESA's Member States. The latter condition means that it is not an open-source license. There are several versions of the Type-1 ESCL in circulation; you may use any official version sanctioned by ESA.\
In addition to choosing only one of the two licenses above, you are permitted to dual-license your own derivative work using the same two licenses, if you prefer.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b University of Tokyo ( A simple C++ library for maximum entropy classification )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2005 Yoshimasa Tsuruoka\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: \
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. \
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b V8 Project ( double-conversion )\

\b0 Copyright 2006-2011, the V8 project authors. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
* Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Daniel Veillard ( libxml2, libxslt )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1998-2002 Daniel Veillard (libxml2); Copyright \'a9 2001-2002 Daniel Veillard (libxslt). All Rights Reserved.\
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DANIEL VEILLARD BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.\
Except as contained in this notice, the name of Daniel Veillard shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization from him.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Gilles Vollant ( minizip )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1998-2005 Gilles Vollant\
Condition of use and distribution are the same than zlib :\
This software is provided 'as-is', without any express or implied warranty. In no event will the authors be held liable for any damages arising from the use of this software.\
Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose, including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it freely, subject to the following restrictions:\
1. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not claim that you wrote the original software. If you use this software in a product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be appreciated but is not required.\
2. Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be misrepresented as being the original software.\
3. This notice may not be removed or altered from any source distribution.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Vovida Networks Inc. ( reSIProcate )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 The Vovida Software License, Version 1.0\
Copyright (c) 2000 Vovida Networks, Inc. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. The names "VOCAL", "Vovida Open Communication Application Library", and "Vovida Open Communication Application Library (VOCAL)" must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. For written permission, please contact vocal@vovida.org.\
4. Products derived from this software may not be called "VOCAL", nor may "VOCAL" appear in their name, without prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL VOVIDA NETWORKS, INC. OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES IN EXCESS OF $1,000, NOR FOR ANY INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Lev Walkin ( ASN.1 compiler )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007 Lev Walkin <vlm@lionet.info>. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\'a0\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. \'a0IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b The WebKit Open Source Project ( including portions from the khtml, kcanvas, kdom, and ksvg2 projects ) and JavaScriptCore Project ( including portions from the kjs project )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1997-2017 Various contributors as noted below.\
Contributors to the WebKit, WebCore and JavaScriptCore projects include: Alex Mathews, Alexander Kellett, Alexey Proskuryakov, Allan Sandfeld Jensen, Alp Toker, Anders Carlsson, Andrew Wellington, Antti Koivisto, Apple Inc., Bjoern Graf, Brent Fulgham, Cameron Zwarich, Charles Samuels, Charlie Bozeman, Christian Dywan, Collabora Ltd., Cyrus Patel, Daniel Molkentin, Daniel Veillard, Dave MacLachlan, David Smith, Dawit Alemayehu, Dirk Mueller, Dirk Schulze, Don Gibson, Enrico Ros, Eric Seidel, Frederik Holljen, Frerich Raabe, Friedemann Kleint, George Staikos, Google Inc., Graham Dennis, Harri Porten, Henry Mason, Hiroyuki Ikezoe, Holger Hans Peter Freyther, International Business Machines Corporation, James G. Speth, Jan Michael C. Alonzo, Jean-loup Gailly, Jon Shier, Jonas Witt, Julien Chaffraix, Justin Haygood, Kevin Ollivier, Kevin Watters, Kimmo Kinnunen, Kouhei Sutou, Krzysztof Kowalczyk, Lars Knoll, Luca Bruno, Lucent Technologies, Maksim Orlovich, Malte Starostik, Mark Adler, Martin Jones, Matt Lilek, Michael Emmel, Netscape Communications Corporation, Nicholas Shanks, Nikolas Zimmermann, Nokia, Corporation, Nuanti Ltd., Oliver Hunt, OpenedHand, Peter Kelly, Pioneer Research Center USA, Inc., Rob Buis, Robin Dunn, Ronald Tschal\'e4r, Samuel Weinig, Simon Hausmann, Staikos Computing Services Inc., Stefan Schimanski, Symantec Corporation, The Karbon Developers, Thomas Broyer, Tim Copperfield, Tobias Anton, Tony Chang, Torben Weis, Trolltech ASA, University of Cambridge, Vaclav Slavik, Waldo Bastian, Xan Lopez, Zack Rusin, mozilla.org.\'a0\
The WebKit, WebCore and JavaScriptCore software is open source software with portions licensed under a BSD license (see Apple's example below) and portions licensed under the GNU Library General Public License Version 2. Please refer to the individual files to determine the license terms that apply to that file. You may obtain a complete machine-readable copy of the source code for the LGPL-licensed portions under the terms of LGPL, without charge except for the cost of media, shipping, and handling, upon written request to Apple. The WebKit software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the LGPL for more details; a copy of the LGPL is included with this product.\
The khtml software is released under the GNU Library General Public License Version 2.\
The kjs software is released under the GNU Library General Public License Version 2. The authors also thank the following people for their help: Richard Moore, Daegeun Lee, Marco Pinelli, and Christian Kirsch. The kcanvas, kdom and ksvg2 software is released under the GNU Library General Public License Version 2.\'a0\
BSD LICENSE\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\'a0\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\'a0\
3. Neither the name of Apple Inc. ("Apple") nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\'a0\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY APPLE AND ITS CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL APPLE OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
GNU LIBRARY GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE\
Version 2, June 1991\'a0\
Copyright \'a9 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.\'a0\
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA\'a0\
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.\'a0\
[This is the first released version of the library GPL. It is numbered 2 because it goes with version 2 of the ordinary GPL.]\'a0\
Preamble\'a0\
The licenses for most software are designed to take away your freedom to share and change it. By contrast, the GNU General Public Licenses are intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free software--to make sure the software is free for all its users. This license, the Library General Public License, applies to some specially designated Free Software Foundation software, and to any other libraries whose authors decide to use it. You can use it for your libraries, too.\'a0\
When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not price. Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for this service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new free programs; and that you know you can do these things.\'a0\
To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights. These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you distribute copies of the library, or if you modify it.\'a0\
For example, if you distribute copies of the library, whether gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that we gave you. You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code. If you link a program with the library, you must provide complete object files to the recipients so that they can relink them with the library, after making changes to the library and recompiling it. And you must show them these terms so they know their rights. Our method of protecting your rights has two steps: (1) copyright the library, and (2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify the library.\'a0\
Also, for each distributor's protection, we want to make certain that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free library. If the library is modified by someone else and passed on, we want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original version, so that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original authors' reputations.\'a0\
Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software patents. We wish to avoid the danger that companies distributing free software will individually obtain patent licenses, thus in effect transforming the program into proprietary software. To prevent this, we have made it clear that any patent must be licensed for everyone's free use or not licensed at all.\'a0\
Most GNU software, including some libraries, is covered by the ordinary GNU General Public License, which was designed for utility programs. This license, the GNU Library General Public License, applies to certain designated libraries. This license is quite different from the ordinary one; be sure to read it in full, and don't assume that anything in it is the same as in the ordinary license.\'a0\
The reason we have a separate public license for some libraries is that they blur the distinction we usually make between modifying or adding to a program and simply using it. Linking a program with a library, without changing the library, is in some sense simply using the library, and is analogous to running a utility program or application program. However, in a textual and legal sense, the linked executable is a combined work, a derivative of the original library, and the ordinary General Public License treats it as such.\'a0\
Because of this blurred distinction, using the ordinary General Public License for libraries did not effectively promote software sharing, because most developers did not use the libraries. We concluded that weaker conditions might promote sharing better.\'a0\
However, unrestricted linking of non-free programs would deprive the users of those programs of all benefit from the free status of the libraries themselves. This Library General Public License is intended to permit developers of non-free programs to use free libraries, while preserving your freedom as a user of such programs to change the free libraries that are incorporated in them. (We have not seen how to achieve this as regards changes in header files, but we have achieved it as regards changes in the actual functions of the Library.) The hope is that this will lead to faster development of free libraries.\'a0\
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and modification follow. Pay close attention to the difference between a "work based on the library" and a "work that uses the library". The former contains code derived from the library, while the latter only works together with the library.\'a0\
Note that it is possible for a library to be covered by the ordinary General Public License rather than by this special one.\'a0\
GNU LIBRARY GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE\'a0\
TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION\'a0\
0. This License Agreement applies to any software library which contains a notice placed by the copyright holder or other authorized party saying it may be distributed under the terms of this Library General Public License (also called "this License"). Each licensee is addressed as "you".\'a0\
A "library" means a collection of software functions and/or data prepared so as to be conveniently linked with application programs (which use some of those functions and data) to form executables.\'a0\
The "Library", below, refers to any such software library or work which has been distributed under these terms. A "work based on the Library" means either the Library or any derivative work under copyright law: that is to say, a work containing the Library or a portion of it, either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated straightforwardly into another language. (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in the term "modification".)\'a0\
"Source code" for a work means the preferred form of the work for making modifications to it. For a library, complete source code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to control compilation and installation of the library.\'a0\
Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not covered by this License; they are outside its scope. The act of running a program using the Library is not restricted, and output from such a program is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the Library (independent of the use of the Library in a tool for writing it). Whether that is true depends on what the Library does and what the program that uses the Library does.\'a0\
1. You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Library's complete source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty; and distribute a copy of this License along with the Library.\'a0\
You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee.\'a0\
2. You may modify your copy or copies of the Library or any portion of it, thus forming a work based on the Library, and copy and distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1 above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:\'a0\
a) The modified work must itself be a software library.\'a0\
b) You must cause the files modified to carry prominent notices stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.\'a0\
c) You must cause the whole of the work to be licensed at no charge to all third parties under the terms of this License.\'a0\
d) If a facility in the modified Library refers to a function or a table of data to be supplied by an application program that uses the facility, other than as an argument passed when the facility is invoked, then you must make a good faith effort to ensure that, in the event an application does not supply such function or table, the facility still operates, and performs whatever part of its purpose remains meaningful.\'a0\
(For example, a function in a library to compute square roots has a purpose that is entirely well-defined independent of the application. Therefore, Subsection 2d requires that any application-supplied function or table used by this function must be optional: if the application does not supply it, the square root function must still compute square roots.)\'a0\
These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole. If identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Library, and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those sections when you distribute them as separate works. But when you distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based on the Library, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it.\'a0\
Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or collective works based on the Library.\'a0\
In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Library with the Library (or with a work based on the Library) on a volume of a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under the scope of this License.\'a0\
3. You may opt to apply the terms of the ordinary GNU General Public License instead of this License to a given copy of the Library. To do this, you must alter all the notices that refer to this License, so that they refer to the ordinary GNU General Public License, version 2, instead of to this License. (If a newer version than version 2 of the ordinary GNU General Public License has appeared, then you can specify that version instead if you wish.) Do not make any other change in these notices.\'a0\
Once this change is made in a given copy, it is irreversible for that copy, so the ordinary GNU General Public License applies to all subsequent copies and derivative works made from that copy.\'a0\
This option is useful when you wish to copy part of the code of the Library into a program that is not a library.\'a0\
4. You may copy and distribute the Library (or a portion or derivative of it, under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange.\'a0\
If distribution of object code is made by offering access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent access to copy the source code from the same place satisfies the requirement to distribute the source code, even though third parties are not compelled to copy the source along with the object code.\'a0\
5. A program that contains no derivative of any portion of the Library, but is designed to work with the Library by being compiled or linked with it, is called a "work that uses the Library". Such a work, in isolation, is not a derivative work of the Library, and therefore falls outside the scope of this License.\'a0\
However, linking a "work that uses the Library" with the Library creates an executable that is a derivative of the Library (because it contains portions of the Library), rather than a "work that uses the library". The executable is therefore covered by this License. Section 6 states terms for distribution of such executables.\'a0\
When a "work that uses the Library" uses material from a header file that is part of the Library, the object code for the work may be a derivative work of the Library even though the source code is not. Whether this is true is especially significant if the work can be linked without the Library, or if the work is itself a library. The threshold for this to be true is not precisely defined by law.\'a0\
If such an object file uses only numerical parameters, data structure layouts and accessors, and small macros and small inline functions (ten lines or less in length), then the use of the object file is unrestricted, regardless of whether it is legally a derivative work. (Executables containing this object code plus portions of the Library will still fall under Section 6.)\'a0\
Otherwise, if the work is a derivative of the Library, you may distribute the object code for the work under the terms of Section 6. Any executables containing that work also fall under Section 6, whether or not they are linked directly with the Library itself.\'a0\
6. As an exception to the Sections above, you may also compile or link a "work that uses the Library" with the Library to produce a work containing portions of the Library, and distribute that work under terms of your choice, provided that the terms permit modification of the work for the customer's own use and reverse engineering for debugging such modifications.\'a0\
You must give prominent notice with each copy of the work that the Library is used in it and that the Library and its use are covered by this License. You must supply a copy of this License. If the work during execution displays copyright notices, you must include the copyright notice for the Library among them, as well as a reference directing the user to the copy of this License. Also, you must do one of these things:\'a0\
a) Accompany the work with the complete corresponding machine-readable source code for the Library including whatever changes were used in the work (which must be distributed under Sections 1 and 2 above); and, if the work is an executable linked with the Library, with the complete machine-readable "work that uses the Library", as object code and/or source code, so that the user can modify the Library and then relink to produce a modified executable containing the modified Library. (It is understood that the user who changes the contents of definitions files in the Library will not necessarily be able to recompile the application to use the modified definitions.)\'a0\
b) Accompany the work with a written offer, valid for at least three years, to give the same user the materials specified in Subsection 6a, above, for a charge no more than the cost of performing this distribution.\'a0\
c) If distribution of the work is made by offering access to copy from a designated place, offer equivalent access to copy the above specified materials from the same place.\'a0\
d) Verify that the user has already received a copy of these materials or that you have already sent this user a copy.\'a0\
For an executable, the required form of the "work that uses the "Library" must include any data and utility programs needed for reproducing the executable from it. However, as a special exception, the source code distributed need not include anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component itself accompanies the executable.\'a0\
It may happen that this requirement contradicts the license restrictions of other proprietary libraries that do not normally accompany the operating system. Such a contradiction means you cannot use both them and the Library together in an executable that you distribute.\'a0\
7. You may place library facilities that are a work based on the Library side-by-side in a single library together with other library facilities not covered by this License, and distribute such a combined library, provided that the separate distribution of the work based on the Library and of the other library facilities is otherwise permitted, and provided that you do these two things:\'a0\
a) Accompany the combined library with a copy of the same work based on the Library, uncombined with any other library facilities. This must be distributed under the terms of the Sections above.\'a0\
b) Give prominent notice with the combined library of the fact that part of it is a work based on the Library, and explaining where to find the accompanying uncombined form of the same work.\'a0\
8. You may not copy, modify, sublicense, link with, or distribute the Library except as expressly provided under this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, link with, or distribute the Library is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License. However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance.\'a0\
9. You are not required to accept this License, since you have not signed it. However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or distribute the Library or its derivative works. These actions are prohibited by law if you do not accept this License. Therefore, by modifying or distributing the Library (or any work based on the Library), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying the Library or works based on it.\'a0\
10. Each time you redistribute the Library (or any work based on the Library), the recipient automatically receives a license from the original licensor to copy, distribute, link with or modify the Library subject to these terms and conditions. You may not impose any further restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein. You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties to this License.\'a0\
11. If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues), conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not excuse you from the conditions of this License. If you cannot distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may not distribute the Library at all. For example, if a patent license would not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Library by all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to refrain entirely from distribution of the Library.\'a0\
If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to apply, and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other circumstances.\'a0\
It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the integrity of the free software distribution system which is implemented by public license practices. Many people have made generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed through that system in reliance on consistent application of that system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot impose that choice.\'a0\
This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to be a consequence of the rest of this License.\'a0\
12. If the distribution and/or use of the Library is restricted in certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the patents or by copyrighted interfaces, theoriginal copyright holder who places the Library under this License may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among countries not thus excluded. In such case, this License incorporates the limitation as if written in the body of this License.\'a0\
13. The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of the Library General Public License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.\'a0\
Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Library specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and "any later version", you have the option of following the terms and conditions either of that version or of any later version published by the Free Software Foundation. If the Library does not specify a license version number, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software Foundation.\'a0\
14. If you wish to incorporate parts of the Library into other free programs whose distribution conditions are incompatible with these, write to the author to ask for permission. For software which is copyrighted by the Free Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes make exceptions for this. Our decision will be guided by the two goals of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.\'a0\
NO WARRANTY\'a0\
15. BECAUSE THE LIBRARY IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE LIBRARY, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW. EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE LIBRARY "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE LIBRARY IS WITH YOU. SHOULD THE LIBRARY PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.\'a0\
16. IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE LIBRARY AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE LIBRARY (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE LIBRARY TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER SOFTWARE), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.\'a0\
END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 
\b The WebRTC Project Authors ( LibWebRTC )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2011, The WebRTC project authors. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
  * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
  * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
  * Neither the name of Google nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 WIDE Project, et al. ( IPsec-Tools, racoon )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 WIDE Project. All rights reserved.\
Copyright \'a9 2004 SuSE Linux AG, Nuernberg, Germany. Contributed by: Michal Ludvig <mludvig@suse.cz>, SUSE Labs. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. Neither the name of the project nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE PROJECT AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE PROJECT OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
Copyright \'a9 2000 Wasabi Systems, Inc., Copyright \'a9 2004-2006 Emmanuel Dreyfus. All rights reserved. This software was written by Frank van der Linden of Wasabi Systems for Zembu Labs, Inc. http://www.zembu.com/\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
3. The name of Wasabi Systems, Inc. may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY WASABI SYSTEMS, INC. ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL WASABI SYSTEMS, INC BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Jonathan Wight ( ObjC-Property-Factory )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 2011-2014 Jonathan Wight. All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY 2011 TOXICSOFTWARE.COM ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL 2011 TOXICSOFTWARE.COM OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
The views and conclusions contained in the software and documentation are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing official policies, either expressed or implied, of 2011 toxicsoftware.com.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Wikipedia\'a0\

\b0 Most text from Wikipedia is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/> and the GNU Free Documentation License <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html>. Check the page for specific licensing terms. Wikipedia\'ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.\
Xiph.org Foundation ( Speex )\
Copyright \'a9 2002-2003, Jean-Marc Valin/Xiph.Org Foundation.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
Neither the name of Xiph.org Foundation nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b World Wide Web Consortium ( tidylib )\

\b0 Copyright \'a9 1998-2003 World Wide Web Consortium (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, European Research Consortium for Informatics and Mathematics, Keio University). All Rights Reserved.\
This software and documentation is provided "as is," and the copyright holders and contributing author(s) make no representations or warranties, express or implied, including but not limited to, warranties of merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose or that the use of the software or documentation will not infringe any third party patents, copyrights, trademarks or other rights.\'a0\
The copyright holders and contributing author(s) will not be held liable for any direct, indirect, special or consequential damages arising out of any use of the software or documentation, even if advised of the possibility of such damage.\
Permission is hereby granted to use, copy, modify, and distribute this source code, or portions hereof, documentation and executables, for any purpose, without fee, subject to the following restrictions:\
1. The origin of this source code must not be misrepresented.\
2. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such and must not be misrepresented as being the original source.\
3. This Copyright notice may not be removed or altered from any source or altered source distribution.\
The copyright holders and contributing author(s) specifically permit, without fee, and encourage the use of this source code as a component for supporting the Hypertext Markup Language in commercial products. If you use this source code in a product, acknowledgment is not required but would be appreciated.\
\uc0\u8232 
\b Xiph.org et al. ( Opus )\

\b0 Copyright 2001-2011 Xiph.Org, Skype Limited, Octasic, Jean-Marc Valin, Timothy B. Terriberry, CSIRO, Gregory Maxwell, Mark Borgerding, Erik de Castro Lopo\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Susumu Yata ( marisa-trie )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 libmarisa and its command line tools are dual-licensed under the BSD 2-clause license and the LGPL. \
* The BSD 2-clause license Copyright \'a9 2010-2013, Susumu Yata All rights reserved. \
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
- Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. \
- Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. \
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. \
* The LGPL 2.1 or any later version marisa-trie - A static and space-efficient trie data structure. \
Copyright \'a9 2010-2013 Susumu Yata \
This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2.1 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU Lesser General Public License for more details. You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Victor Zverovich ( fmt )\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2012 - 2016, Victor Zverovich  All rights reserved.\
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:\
1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.\
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.\
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.\uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 ZXing Project (ZXing)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2007-2011 Members of the ZXing Project\
Apache License Version 2.0, January 2004\
TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR USE, REPRODUCTION, AND DISTRIBUTION\
1. Definitions.\
"License" shall mean the terms and conditions for use, reproduction, and distribution as defined by Sections 1 through 9 of this document.\
"Licensor" shall mean the copyright owner or entity authorized by the copyright owner that is granting the License.\
"Legal Entity" shall mean the union of the acting entity and all other entities that control, are controlled by, or are under common control with that entity. For the purposes of this definition, "control" means (i) the power, direct or indirect, to cause the direction or management of such entity, whether by contract or otherwise, or (ii) ownership of fifty percent (50%) or more of the outstanding shares, or (iii) beneficial ownership of such entity.\
"You" (or "Your") shall mean an individual or Legal Entity exercising permissions granted by this License.\
"Source" form shall mean the preferred form for making modifications, including but not limited to software source code, documentation source, and configuration files.\
"Object" form shall mean any form resulting from mechanical transformation or translation of a Source form, including but not limited to compiled object code, generated documentation, and conversions to other media types.\
"Work" shall mean the work of authorship, whether in Source or Object form, made available under the License, as indicated by a copyright notice that is included in or attached to the work (an example is provided in the Appendix below).\
"Derivative Works" shall mean any work, whether in Source or Object form, that is based on (or derived from) the Work and for which the editorial revisions, annotations, elaborations, or other modifications represent, as a whole, an original work of authorship. For the purposes of this License, Derivative Works shall not include works that remain separable from, or merely link (or bind by name) to the interfaces of, the Work and Derivative Works thereof.\
"Contribution" shall mean any work of authorship, including the original version of the Work and any modifications or additions to that Work or Derivative Works thereof, that is intentionally submitted to Licensor for inclusion in the Work by the copyright owner or by an individual or Legal Entity authorized to submit on behalf of the copyright owner. For the purposes of this definition, "submitted" means any form of electronic, verbal, or written communication sent to the Licensor or its representatives, including but not limited to communication on electronic mailing lists, source code control systems, and issue tracking systems that are managed by, or on behalf of, the Licensor for the purpose of discussing and improving the Work, but excluding communication that is conspicuously marked or otherwise designated in writing by the copyright owner as "Not a Contribution."\
"Contributor" shall mean Licensor and any individual or Legal Entity on behalf of whom a Contribution has been received by Licensor and subsequently incorporated within the Work.\
2. Grant of Copyright License. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, each Contributor hereby grants to You a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable copyright license to reproduce, prepare Derivative Works of, publicly display, publicly perform, sublicense, and distribute the Work and such Derivative Works in Source or Object form.\
3. Grant of Patent License. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, each Contributor hereby grants to You a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable (except as stated in this section) patent license to make, have made, use, offer to sell, sell, import, and otherwise transfer the Work, where such license applies only to those patent claims licensable by such Contributor that are necessarily infringed by their Contribution(s) alone or by combination of their Contribution(s) with the Work to which such Contribution(s) was submitted. If You institute patent litigation against any entity (including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that the Work or a Contribution incorporated within the Work constitutes direct or contributory patent infringement, then any patent licenses granted to You under this License for that Work shall terminate as of the date such litigation is filed.\
4. Redistribution. You may reproduce and distribute copies of the Work or Derivative Works thereof in any medium, with or without modifications, and in Source or Object form, provided that You meet the following conditions:\
\'95 You must give any other recipients of the Work or Derivative Works a copy of this License; and\
\'95 You must cause any modified files to carry prominent notices stating that You changed the files; and\
\'95 You must retain, in the Source form of any Derivative Works that You distribute, all copyright, patent, trademark, and attribution notices from the Source form of the Work, excluding those notices that do not pertain to any part of the Derivative Works; and\
\'95 If the Work includes a "NOTICE" text file as part of its distribution, then any Derivative Works that You distribute must include a readable copy of the attribution notices contained within such NOTICE file, excluding those notices that do not pertain to any part of the Derivative Works, in at least one of the following places: within a NOTICE text file distributed as part of the Derivative Works; within the Source form or documentation, if provided along with the Derivative Works; or, within a display generated by the Derivative Works, if and wherever such third-party notices normally appear. The contents of the NOTICE file are for informational purposes only and do not modify the License. You may add Your own attribution notices within Derivative Works that You distribute, alongside or as an addendum to the NOTICE text from the Work, provided that such additional attribution notices cannot be construed as modifying the License. You may add Your own copyright statement to Your modifications and may provide additional or different license terms and conditions for use, reproduction, or distribution of Your modifications, or for any such Derivative Works as a whole, provided Your use, reproduction, and distribution of the Work otherwise complies with the conditions stated in this License.\
5. Submission of Contributions. Unless You explicitly state otherwise, any Contribution intentionally submitted for inclusion in the Work by You to the Licensor shall be under the terms and conditions of this License, without any additional terms or conditions. Notwithstanding the above, nothing herein shall supersede or modify the terms of any separate license agreement you may have executed with Licensor regarding such Contributions.\
6. Trademarks. This License does not grant permission to use the trade names, trademarks, service marks, or product names of the Licensor, except as required for reasonable and customary use in describing the origin of the Work and reproducing the content of the NOTICE file.\
7. Disclaimer of Warranty. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, Licensor provides the Work (and each Contributor provides its Contributions) on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied, including, without limitation, any warranties or conditions of TITLE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY, or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. You are solely responsible for determining the appropriateness of using or redistributing the Work and assume any risks associated with Your exercise of permissions under this License.\
8. Limitation of Liability. In no event and under no legal theory, whether in tort (including negligence), contract, or otherwise, unless required by applicable law (such as deliberate and grossly negligent acts) or agreed to in writing, shall any Contributor be liable to You for damages, including any direct, indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages of any character arising as a result of this License or out of the use or inability to use the Work (including but not limited to damages for loss of goodwill, work stoppage, computer failure or malfunction, or any and all other commercial damages or losses), even if such Contributor has been advised of the possibility of such damages.\
9. Accepting Warranty or Additional Liability. While redistributing the Work or Derivative Works thereof, You may choose to offer, and charge a fee for, acceptance of support, warranty, indemnity, or other liability obligations and/or rights consistent with this License. However, in accepting such obligations, You may act only on Your own behalf and on Your sole responsibility, not on behalf of any other Contributor, and only if You agree to indemnify, defend, and hold each Contributor harmless for any liability incurred by, or claims asserted against, such Contributor by reason of your accepting any such warranty or additional liability.\
END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS\
APPENDIX: How to apply the Apache License to your work\
To apply the Apache License to your work, attach the following boilerplate notice, with the fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying information. (Don't include the brackets!) The text should be enclosed in the appropriate comment syntax for the file format. We also recommend that a file or class name and description of purpose be included on the same "printed page" as the copyright notice for easier identification within third-party archives.\
Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]\
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");\uc0\u8232 you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.\u8232 You may obtain a copy of the License at\
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0\
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.\
\uc0\u8232 Additional attributions for third-party software that may be used by Siri can be viewed at this link:  https://ascf1.apple.com/attributions.html\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\fs20 \cf0 \
7-21-2017 BPC\
macOS}