.\" $XFree86: xc/programs/Xserver/hw/xfree86/drivers/mga/mga.man,v 1.8 2003/04/03 07:42:13 herrb Exp $ 
.\" shorthand for double quote that works everywhere.
.ds q \N'34'
.TH MGA __drivermansuffix__ __vendorversion__
.SH NAME
mga \- Matrox video driver
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B "Section \*qDevice\*q"
.BI "  Identifier \*q"  devname \*q
.B  "  Driver \*qmga\*q"
\ \ ...
.B EndSection
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mga 
is an XFree86 driver for Matrox video cards.  The driver is fully
accelerated, and provides support for the following framebuffer depths:
8, 15, 16, 24, and an 8+24 overlay mode.  All
visual types are supported for depth 8, and both TrueColor and DirectColor
visuals are supported for the other depths except 8+24 mode which supports
PseudoColor, GrayScale and TrueColor.  Multi-card configurations
are supported.  XVideo is supported on G200 and newer systems, with
either
.B TexturedVideo
or video overlay.  The second head of dual-head cards is supported for
the G450 and G550.  Support for the second head on G400 cards requires
a binary-only "mga_hal" module that is available from Matrox
<http://www.matrox.com>, and may be on the CD supplied with the card. 
That module also provides various other enhancements,
and may be necessary to use the DVI (digital) output on the G550
(and other cards).
.SH SUPPORTED HARDWARE
The
.B mga
driver supports PCI and AGP video cards based on the following Matrox chips:
.TP 12
.B MGA2064W
Millennium (original)
.TP 12
.B MGA1064SG
Mystique
.TP 12
.B MGA2164W
Millennium II
.TP 12
.B G100
.TP 12
.B G200
Millennium G200 and Mystique G200
.TP 12
.B G400
.TP 12
.B G450
.TP 12
.B G550
.SH CONFIGURATION DETAILS
Please refer to XF86Config(__filemansuffix__) for general configuration
details.  This section only covers configuration details specific to this
driver.
.PP
The driver auto-detects the chipset type, but the following
.B ChipSet
names may optionally be specified in the config file
.B \*qDevice\*q
section, and will override the auto-detection:
.PP
.RS 4
"mga2064w", "mga1064sg", "mga2164w", "mga2164w agp", "mgag100", "mgag200",
"mgag200 pci", "mgag400", "mgag550".
.RE
.PP
The G450 is Chipset "mgag400" with ChipRev 0x80.
.PP
The driver will auto-detect the amount of video memory present for all
chips except the Millennium II.  In the Millennium II case it defaults
to 4096\ kBytes.  When using a Millennium II, the actual amount of video
memory should be specified with a
.B VideoRam
entry in the config file
.B \*qDevice\*q
section.
.PP
The following driver
.B Options
are supported:
.TP
.BI "Option \*qColorKey\*q \*q" integer \*q
Set the colormap index used for the transparency key for the depth 8 plane
when operating in 8+24 overlay mode.  The value must be in the range
2\-255.  Default: 255.
.TP
.BI "Option \*qHWCursor\*q \*q" boolean \*q
Enable or disable the HW cursor.  Default: on.
.TP
.BI "Option \*qMGASDRAM\*q \*q" boolean \*q
Specify whether G100, G200 or G400 cards have SDRAM.  The driver attempts to
auto-detect this based on the card's PCI subsystem ID.  This option may
be used to override that auto-detection.  The mga driver is not able to 
auto-detect the presence of of SDRAM on secondary heads in multihead configurations
so this option will often need to be specified in multihead configurations.
Default: auto-detected.
.TP
.BI "Option \*qNoAccel\*q \*q" boolean \*q
Disable or enable acceleration.  Default: acceleration is enabled.
.TP
.BI "Option \*qNoHal\*q \*q" boolean \*q
Disable or enable loading the "mga_hal" module.  Default: the module is
loaded when available and when using hardware that it supports.
.TP
.BI "Option \*qOverclockMem\*q"
Set clocks to values used by some commercial X-Servers (G100, G200 and G400
only).  Default: off.
.TP
.BI "Option \*qOverlay\*q \*q" value \*q
Enable 8+24 overlay mode.  Only appropriate for depth 24. 
Recognized values are: "8,24", "24,8". Default: off.
.RB ( Note: 
the G100 is unaccelerated in the 8+24 overlay mode due to a missing 
hardware feature.) 
.TP
.BI "Option \*qPciRetry\*q \*q" boolean \*q
Enable or disable PCI retries.  Default: off.
.TP
.BI "Option \*qRotate\*q \*qCW\*q"
.TP
.BI "Option \*qRotate\*q \*qCCW\*q"
Rotate the display clockwise or counterclockwise.  This mode is unaccelerated.
Default: no rotation.
.TP
.BI "Option \*qShadowFB\*q \*q" boolean \*q
Enable or disable use of the shadow framebuffer layer.  Default: off.
.TP
.BI "Option \*qSyncOnGreen\*q \*q" boolean \*q
Enable or disable combining the sync signals with the green signal.
Default: off.
.TP
.BI "Option \*qUseFBDev\*q \*q" boolean \*q
Enable or disable use of on OS-specific fb interface (and is not supported
on all OSs).  See fbdevhw(__drivermansuffix__) for further information.
Default: off.
.TP
.BI "Option \*qVideoKey\*q \*q" integer \*q
This sets the default pixel value for the YUV video overlay key.
Default: undefined.
.TP
.BI "Option \*qTexturedVideo\*q \*q" boolean \*q
This has XvImage support use the texture engine rather than the video overlay.
This option is only supported by the G200 and G400, and only in 16 and 32 
bits per pixel.
Default: off.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
XFree86(1), XF86Config(__filemansuffix__), xf86config(1), Xserver(1), X(__miscmansuffix__)
.SH AUTHORS
Authors include: Radoslaw Kapitan, Mark Vojkovich, and also David Dawes, Guy
Desbief, Dirk Hohndel, Doug Merritt, Andrew E. Mileski, Andrew van der Stock,
Leonard N. Zubkoff, Andrew C. Aitchison.
