.TH DRIVERLOADER 8 "August 9, 1994" "Apple Computer, Inc."
.SH NAME
driverLoader \- load or configure a driver
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB/usr/etc/driverLoader\fR [ \fBaiv\fR ] [ \fBd=\fIdeviceName\fR ] [ \fIinstance\fR ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIdriverLoader\fR loads or configures a driver after boot time.  \fIdriverLoader\fR is normally used in the script
.B /etc/rc
during automatic reboot.
.PP
The \fId\fR option configures one device interactively.  This is how you load drivers that aren't specified in the system configuration, and is generally used to test a device driver.
For example, specifying the \fB-d\fR option as in this command:
.LP
.DS
/usr/etc/driverLoader d=Adaptec1542B
.DE
.LP
initiates an interactive dialog (user input in \fBbold\fR):
.LP
.DS
Answer queries with 'y' for 'yes', anything else is 'no'.
Execute Pre\-Load file (\fIpre\-load filename\fR)? \fBy\fR
Load driver Adaptec1542B? \fBy\fR
Configure driver Adaptec1542B unit 0? \fBy\fR
Execute Post-Load file (\fIpost\-load filename\fR)? \fBy\fR
.DE
.LP
The queries about Pre\-Load and Post\-Load files only appear if the driver
supports such files. The filenames for the Pre\-Load and Post\-Load files are specific to a given driver. 
.PP
You provide the \fIinstance\fR argument to specify an \fBInstance\fIn\fB.table\fR file. For example, if you specify instance as 1, the driver will be probed using the information in its \fBInstance1.table\fR file. 
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "a"
Configure all devices.  This option is generally used when \fIdriverLoader\fR is run during system boot in the script \fB/etc/rc\fR.
.TP
\fBd=\fIdeviceName\fR	
Configure \fIdeviceName\fR interactively.  
.TP
.B "i"
Enable interactive mode to view all active and boot drivers in the system configuration.  
.TP
.B "v"
Produce verbose output.  
.SH EXAMPLES
/usr/etc/driverLoader d=fooDriver
.PP
/usr/etc/driverLoader d=fooDriver 1

