.\"
.\" GNU enscript manual page.
.\" Copyright (c) 1995-1999 Markku Rossi.
.\" Author: Markku Rossi <mtr@iki.fi>
.\"
.\"
.\" This file is part of GNU enscript.
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
.\" the Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
.\" Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.TH ENSCRIPT 1 "Mar 12, 1999" "ENSCRIPT" "ENSCRIPT"

.SH NAME
enscript \- convert text files to PostScript, HTML, RTF, ANSI, and
overstrikes

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B enscript
[\f3\-123456789BcgGhjkKlmOqrRvVzZ\f1]
[\f3\-# \f2copies\f1]
[\f3\-a \f2pages\f1]
[\f3\-A \f2align\f1]
[\f3\-b \f2header\f1]
[\f3\-C\f1[\f2start_line\f1]]
[\f3\-d \f2printer\f1]
[\f3\-D \f2key\f1[\f3:\f2value\f1]]
[\f3\-e\f1[\f2char\f1]]
[\f3\-E\f1[\f2lang\f1]]
[\f3\-f \f2font\f1]
[\f3\-F \f2header_font\f1]
[\f3\-H\f1[\f2num\f1]]
[\f3\-i \f2indent\f1]
[\f3\-I \f2filter\f1]
[\f3\-J \f2title\f1]
[\f3\-L \f2lines_per_page\f1]
[\f3\-M \f2media\f1]
[\f3\-n \f2copies\f1]
[\f3\-N \f2newline\f1]
[\f3\-o \f2outputfile\f1]
[\f3\-o \-\f1]
[\f3\-p \f2outputfile\f1]
[\f3\-p \-\f1]
[\f3\-P \f2printer\f1]
[\f3\-s \f2baselineskip\f1]
[\f3\-S \f2key\f1[\f3:\f2value\f1]]
[\f3\-t \f2title\f1]
[\f3\-T \f2tabsize\f1]
[\f3\-u\f1[\f2text\f1]]
[\f3\-U \f2num\f1]
[\f3\-W \f2language\f1]
[\f3\-X \f2encoding\f1]
[\f2filename\f1 ...]

.SH DESCRIPTION

\f3Enscript\f1 converts text files to PostScript or to other output
languages.  \f3Enscript\f1 can spool the generated output directly to
a specified printer or leave it to a file.  If no input files are
given, \f3enscript\f1 processes the standard input \f3stdin\f1.
\f3Enscript\f1 can be extended to handle different output media and it
has many options which can be used to customize the printouts.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B \-# \f2num\f3
Print \f2num\f1 copies of each page.
.TP 8
.B \-1, \-2, \-3, \-4, \-5, \-6, \-7, \-8, \-9, \-\-columns=\f2num\f3
Specify how many columns each page have.  With the long option
\f3\-\-columns=\f2num\f1 you can specify more than 9 columns per page.
.TP 8
.B \-a \f2pages\f3, \-\-pages=\f2pages\f3
Specify which pages are printed.  The page specification \f2pages\f1
can be given in the following formats:
.RS 8
.TP 8
\f2begin\f1\-\f2end\f1
print pages from \f2begin\f1 to \f2end\f1
.TP 8
\-\f2end\f1
print pages from 0 to \f2end\f1
.TP 8
\f2begin\f1\-
print pages from \f2begin\f1 to end
.TP 8
\f2page\f1
print page \f2page\f1
.TP 8
odd
print odd pages
.TP 8
even
print even pages
.RE
.TP 8
.B \-A \f2align\f3, \-\-file\-align=\f2align\f3
Align separate input files to even \f2align\f1 page count.  This
option is useful in two-side and 2-up printings (\-\-file\-align=2).
.TP 8
.B \-b \f2header\f3, \-\-header=\f2header\f3
Use the text \f2header\f1 as a page header.  The default page header
is constructed from the name of the file and from its last
modification time.

The header string \f2header\f1 can contain the same formatting escapes
which can be specified for the \f3%Format\f1 directives in the user
defined fancy headers.  For example, the following option prints the
file name, current data and page numbers:

\f3enscript \-\-header='$n %W Page $% of $=' *.c\f1

The header string can also contain left, center and right justified
fields.  The fields are separated by the \f3'|'\f1 character:

\f3enscript \-\-header='$n|%W|Page $% of $=' *.c\f1

now the file name is printed left justified, the date is centered to
the header and the page numbers are printed right justified.
.TP 8
.B \-B, \-\-no\-header
Do not print page headers.
.TP 8
.B \-c, \-\-truncate\-lines
Cut lines that are too long for the page.  As a default,
\f3enscript\f1 wraps long lines to the next line so no information is
lost.

You can also use the \f3\-\-slice\f1 option which slices long lines to
separate pages.
.TP 8
.B \-C\f1[\f2start_line\f1]\f3, \-\-line\-numbers\f1[\f3=\f2start_line\f1]\f3
Precede each line with its line number.  The optional argument
\f2start_line\f1 specifies the number of the first line in the input.
The number of the first line defaults to 1.
.TP 8
.B \-d \f2name\f3
Spool output to the printer \f2name\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-D \f2key\f1[\f3:\f2value\f1]\f3, \-\-setpagedevice=\f2key\f1[\f3:\f2value\f1]\f3
Pass a page device definition to the generated PostScript output.  If
no value is given, the key \f2key\f1 is removed from the definitions.

For example, the command

.B enscript \-DDuplex:true foo.txt

prints file foo.txt in duplex (two side) mode.

Page device operators are implementation dependent but they are
standardized.  See section \f3PAGE DEVICE OPTIONS\f1 for the details.
.TP 8
.B \-e\f1[\f2char\f1]\f3, \-\-escapes\f1[\f3=\f2char\f1]\f3
Enable special escapes interpretation (see section \f3SPECIAL
ESCAPES\f1).  If the argument \f2char\f1 is given, it changes the
escape character to \f2char\f1.  The default escape character is 0.
.TP 8
.B \-E\f1[\f2lang\f1]\f3, \-\-highlight\f1[\f3=\f2lang\f1]\f3
Highlight source code by creating a special input filter with the
\f3states\f1 program.  The optional argument \f2lang\f1 specifies the
language to highlight.  As a default the \f3states\f1 makes an
educated guess.

You can print a short description of the supported highlighting
languages and file formats with the command:

.B enscript \-\-help\-highlight

The highlighting rules are defined in the
`@DATADIR@/enscript/st/*.st' files which can be edited to create
highlighting definitions for new languages.

\f3Note!\f1 You can not use your own input filters with this option.
.TP 8
.B \-f \f2name\f3, \-\-font=\f2name\f3
Select a font that is used for the body text.  The default body font is
\f3Courier10\f1, unless multicolumn landscape printing mode is
selected, in which case the default font is \f3Courier7\f1.

The font specification \f2name\f1 contains two parts: the name of the
font and its size in PostScript points.  For example,
"\f3Times\-Roman12\f1" selects the "Times\-Roman" font with size
12pt.

The font specification \f2name\f1 can also be given in format
`\f2name\f1@\f2ptsize\f1', where the name of the font and its point
size are separated by a `@' character.  This allows \f3enscript\f1 to use
fonts which contain digit characters in their names.

The font point size can also be given in the format
\f2width\f1/\f2height\f1 where the \f2width\f1 and the \f2height\f1
specify the size of the font in x- and y-directions.  For example,
"\f3Times\-Roman@10/12\f1" selects a 10 points wide and 12 points high
"Times\-Roman" font.

You can also give the font sizes as decimal numbers.  For example,
"\f3Times\-Roman10.2\f1" selects a 10.2pt "Times\-Roman" font.
.TP 8
.B \-F \f2name\f3, \-\-header\-font=\f2name\f3
Select a font for the header texts.
.TP 8
.B \-g, \-\-print\-anyway
Print a file even if it contains binary data.  The option is
implemented only for compatibility purposes.  \f3Enscript\f1 prints
binary files anyway regardless of the option.
.TP 8
.B \-G, \-\-fancy\-header\f1[\f3=\f2name\f1]\f3
Print a fancy page header \f2name\f1 to the top of each page.  The
option \f3\-G\f1 specifies the default fancy header.  See section
\f3CONFIGURATION FILES\f1 to see how the default fancy header can be
changed.
.TP 8
.B \-h, \-\-no\-job\-header
Suppress printing of the job header page.
.TP 8
.B \-H\f1[\f2num\f1]\f3, \-\-highlight\-bars\f1[\f3=\f2num\f1]\f3
Specify how high the highlight bars are in lines.  If the \f2num\f1 is
not given, the default value 2 is used.  As a default, no highlight bars
are printed.
.TP 8
.B \-i \f2num\f3, \-\-indent=\f2num\f3
Indent every line \f2num\f1 characters.  The indentation can also be
specified in other units by appending an unit specifier after the
number.  The possible unit specifiers and the corresponding units are:
.RS 8
.TP 8
.B c
centimeters
.TP 8
.B i
inches
.TP 8
.B l
characters (default)
.TP 8
.B p
PostScript points
.RE
.TP 8
.B \-I \f2filter\f3, \-\-filter=\f2filter\f1
Read all input files through an input filter \f2filter\f1.  The input
filter can be a single command or a command pipeline.  The filter can
refer to the name of the input file with the escape `\f3%s\f1'.  The
name of the standard input can be changed with the option
`\f3\-\-filter\-stdin\f1'.

For example, the following command prints the file `foo.c' by using
only upper-case characters:

.B enscript \-\-filter="cat %s | tr 'a-z' 'A-Z'" foo.c

The following command highlights changes which are made to files since
the last checkout:

.B enscript \-\-filter="rcsdiff %s | diffpp %s" \-e *.c

To include the string "%s" to the filter command, you must write it as
"%%s".
.TP 8
.B \-j, \-\-borders
Print borders around columns.
.TP 8
.B \-J \f2title\f3
An alias for the option \f3\-t\f1, \f3\-\-title\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-k, \-\-page\-prefeed
Enable page prefeed.
.TP 8
.B \-K, \-\-no\-page\-prefeed
Disable page prefeed (default).
.TP 8
.B \-l, \-\-lineprinter
Emulate lineprinter.  This option is a shortcut for the options
\f3\-\-lines\-per\-page=66\f1, and \f3\-\-no\-header\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-L \f2num\f3, \-\-lines\-per\-page=\f2num\f3
Print only \f2num\f1 lines for each page.  As a default, the number of
lines per page is computed from the height of the page and from the
size of the font.
.TP 8
.B \-m, \-\-mail
Send a mail notification to user after the print job has been
completed.
.TP 8
.B \-M \f2name\f3, \-\-media=\f2name\f3
Select an output media \f2name\f1.  \f3Enscript\f1's default output
media is \f3@media@\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-n \f2num\f3, \-\-copies=\f2num\f3
Print \f2num\f1 copies of each page.
.TP 8
.B \-N \f2nl\f3, \-\-newline=\f2nl\f3
Select the \f2newline\f1 character.  The possible values for \f2nl\f1
are: \f3n\f1 (unix newline, 0xa hex) and \f3r\f1 (mac newline, 0xd hex).
.TP 8
.B \-o \f2file\f3
An alias for the option \f3\-p\f1, \f3\-\-output\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-O, \-\-missing\-characters
Print a listing of character codes which couldn't be printed.
.TP 8
.B \-p \f2file\f3, \-\-output=\f2file\f3
Leave the output to file \f2file\f1.  If the \f2file\f1 is `\-',
enscript sends the output to the standard output \f3stdout\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-P \f2name\f3, \-\-printer=\f2name\f3
Spool the output to the printer \f2name\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-q, \-\-quiet, \-\-silent
Make \f3enscript\f1 really quiet.  Only fatal error messages are
printed to \f2stderr\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-r, \-\-landscape
Print in the landscape mode; rotate page 90 degrees.
.TP 8
.B \-R, \-\-portrait
Print in the portrait mode (default).
.TP 8
.B \-s \f2num\f3, \-\-baselineskip=\f2num\f3
Specify the baseline skip in PostScript points.  The number \f2num\f1
can be given as a decimal number.  When \f3enscript\f1 moves from line
to line, the current point \f2y\f1 coordinate is moved (\f2font point
size + baselineskip\f1) points down.  The default baseline skip is 1.
.TP 8
.B \-S \f2key\f1[\f3:\f2value\f1]\f3, \-\-statusdict=\f2key\f1[\f3:\f2value\f1]\f3
Pass a statusdict definition to the generated PostScript output.  If
no value is given, the key \f2key\f1 is removed from the definitions.

The statusdict operators are implementation dependent; see the
printer's documentation for the details.

For example, the command

.B enscript \-Ssetpapertray:1 foo.txt

prints the file \f2foo.txt\f1 by using paper from the paper tray 1
(assuming that the printer supports paper tray selection).
.TP 8
.B \-t \f2title\f3, \-\-title=\f2title\f3
Set banner page's job title to \f2title\f1.  The option sets also the
name of the input file \f3stdin\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-T \f2num\f3, \-\-tabsize=\f2num\f3
Set the tabulator size to \f2num\f1 characters.  The default is 8.
.TP 8
.B \-u\f1[\f2text\f1]\f3, \-\-underlay\f1[\f3=\f2text\f1]\f3
Print the string \f2text\f1 under every page.  The properties of the
text can be changed with the options \f3\-\-ul\-angle\f1,
\f3\-\-ul\-font\f1, \f3\-\-ul\-gray\f1, \f3\-\-ul\-position\f1, and
\f3\-\-ul\-style\f1.

If no \f2text\f1 is given, the underlay is not printed.  This can be used
to remove an underlay text that was specified with the
`\f3Underlay\f1' configuration file option.
.TP 8
.B \-U \f2num\f3, \-\-nup=\f2num\f3
Print \f2num\f1 logical pages on each output page (N\-up printing).
The values \f2num\f1 must be a power of 2.
.TP 8
.B \-v, \-\-verbose\f1[\f3=\f2level\f1]\f3
Tell what \f3enscript\f1 is doing.
.TP 8
.B \-V, \-\-version
Print \f3enscript\f1 version information and exit.
.TP 8
.B \-W \f1[\f2lang\f1]\f3, \-\-language\f1[\f3=\f2lang\f1]\f3
Generate output for the language \f2lang\f1.  The possible values for
\f2lang\f1 are:
.RS 8
.TP 8
.B PostScript
generate PostScript (default)
.TP 8
.B html
generate HTML
.TP 8
.B overstrike
generate overstrikes (line printers, less)
.TP 8
.B rtf
generate RTF (Rich Text Format)
.TP 8
.B ansi
generate ANSI terminal control codes
.RE
.TP 8
.B \-X \f2name\f3, \-\-encoding=\f2name\f3
Use the input encoding \f2name\f1.  Currently \f3enscript\f1 supports
the following encodings:
.RS 8
.TP 8
.B 88591, latin1
ISO\-8859\-1 (ISO Latin1) (\f3enscript\f1's default encoding).
.TP 8
.B 88592, latin2
ISO\-8859\-2 (ISO Latin2)
.TP 8
.B 88593, latin3
ISO\-8859\-3 (ISO Latin3)
.TP 8
.B 88594, latin4
ISO\-8859\-4 (ISO Latin4)
.TP 8
.B 88595, cyrillic
ISO\-8859\-5 (ISO Cyrillic)
.TP 8
.B 88597, greek
ISO\-8859\-7 (ISO Greek)
.TP 8
.B 88599, latin5
ISO\-8859\-9 (ISO Latin5)
.TP 8
.B 885910, latin6
ISO\-8859\-10 (ISO Latin6)
.TP 8
.B ascii
7\-bit ascii
.TP 8
.B asciifise, asciifi, asciise
7\-bit ascii with some scandinavian (Finland, Sweden) extensions
.TP 8
.B asciidkno, asciidk, asciino
7\-bit ascii with some scandinavian (Denmark, Norway) extensions
.TP 8
.B ibmpc, pc, dos
IBM PC charset
.TP 8
.B mac
Mac charset
.TP 8
.B vms
VMS multinational charset
.TP 8
.B hp8
HP Roman-8 charset
.TP 8
.B koi8
Adobe Standard Cyrillic Font KOI8 charset
.TP 8
.B ps, PS
PostScript font's default encoding
.TP 8
.B pslatin1, ISOLatin1Encoding
PostScript interpreter's `ISOLatin1Encoding'
.RE
.TP 8
.B \-z, \-\-no\-formfeed
Turn off the form feed character interpretation.
.TP 8
.B \-Z, \-\-pass\-through
Pass through all PostScript and PCL files without any modifications.
This allows that \f3enscript\f1 can be used as a lp filter.

The PostScript files are recognized by looking up the `%!' magic
cookie from the beginning of the file. \f3Note!\f1 \f3Enscript\f1
recognized also the Windoze damaged `^D%!' cookie.

The PCL files are recognized by looking up the `^[E' or `^[%' magic
cookies from the beginning of the file.
.TP 8
.B \-\-color\f1[\f3=\f2bool\f1]\f3
Use colors in the highlighting outputs.
.TP 8
.B \-\-download\-font=\f2fontname\f3
Include the font description file (\f2.pfa\f1 or \f2.pfb\f1 file) of
the font \f2fontname\f1 to the generated output.
.TP 8
.B \-\-extended\-return\-values
Enable extended return values.  As a default, \f3enscript\f1 returns 1
on error and 0 otherwise.  The extended return values give more
details about the printing operation.  See the section \f3RETURN
VALUE\f1 for the details.
.TP 8
.B \-\-filter\-stdin=\f2name\f1
Specify how the \f3stdin\f1 is shown to the input filter.  The default
value is an empty string ("") but some programs require that the
\f3stdin\f1 is called something else, usually "-".
.TP 8
.B \-\-footer=\f2footer\f3
Use the text \f2footer\f1 as a page footer.  Otherwise the option
works like the \f3\-\-header\f1 option
.TP 8
.B \-\-h\-column\-height=\f2height\f3
Set the horizontal column height to be \f2height\f1 PostScript
points.  The option sets the formfeed type to
\f3horizontal\-columns\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-\-help
Print a short help message and exit.
.TP 8
.B \-\-help\-highlight
Describe all supported \f3\-\-highlight\f1 languages and file
formats.
.TP 8
.B \-\-highlight\-bar\-gray=\f2gray\f3
Specify the gray level which is used in printing the highlight bars.
.TP 8
.B \-\-list\-media
List the names of all known output media and exit successfully.
.TP 8
.B \-\-margins=\f2left\f3:\f2right\f3:\f2top\f3:\f2bottom\f3
Adjust the page marginals to be exactly \f2left\f1, \f2right\f1, \f2top\f1
and \f2bottom\f1 PostScript points.  Any of the arguments can be left
empty in which case the default value is used.
.TP 8
.B \-\-mark\-wrapped\-lines\f1[\f3=\f2style\f1]\f3
Mark wrapped lines in the output with the style \f2style\f1.  The
possible values for the \f2style\f1 are:
.RS 8
.TP 8
.B none
do not mark them (default)
.TP 8
.B plus
print a plus (+) character to the end of each wrapped line
.TP 8
.B box
print a black box to the end of each wrapped line
.TP 8
.B arrow
print a small arrow to the end of each wrapped line
.RE
.TP 8
.B \-\-non\-printable\-format=\f2format\f3
Specify how the non-printable characters are printed.  The possible
values for the \f2format\f1 are:
.RS 8
.TP 8
.B caret
caret notation: `^@', `^A', `^B', ...
.TP 8
.B octal
octal notation: `\\000', `\\001', `\\002', ... (default)
.TP 8
.B questionmark
replace non-printable characters with a question mark `?'
.TP 8
.B space
replace non-printable characters with a space ` '
.RE
.TP 8
.B \-\-nup\-columnwise
Change the layout of the sub-pages in the N\-up printing from row-wise
to columnwise.
.TP 8
.B \-\-nup\-xpad=\f2num\f3
Set the page x-padding of the \f2n\f1-up printing to \f2num\f1
PostScript points.  The default is 10 points.
.TP 8
.B \-\-nup\-ypad=\f2num\f3
Set the page y-padding of the \f2n\f1-up printing to \f2num\f1
PostScript points.  The default is 10 points.
.TP 8
.B \-\-page\-label\-format=\f2format\f3
Set the page label format to \f2format\f1.  The page label format
specifies how the labels for the `%%Page:' PostScript comments are
formatted.  The possible values are:
.RS 8
.TP 8
.B short
Print the current pagenumber: `%%Page: (1) 1' (default)
.TP 8
.B long
Print the current filename and pagenumber: `%%Page: (main.c:  1) 1'
.RE
.TP 8
.B \-\-ps\-level=\f2level\f3
Set the PostScript language level that \f3enscript\f1 uses for its
output to \f2level\f1.  The possible values are \f31\f1, and
\f32\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-\-printer\-options=\f2options\f3
Pass extra options to the printer command.
.TP 8
.B \-\-rotate\-even\-pages
Rotate each even\-numbered page 180 degrees.
.TP 8
.B \-\-slice=\f2num\f3
Print the vertical slice \f2num\f1.  The slices are vertical regions
of input files.  A new slice starts from the point where the line
would otherwise be wrapped to the next line.  The slice numbers start
from 1.
.TP 8
.B \-\-style=\f2style\f3
Set the highlighting style to \f2style\f1.  The possible values are:
\f3a2ps\f1, \f3emacs\f1, \f3emacs-verbose\f1, \f3ifh\f1, and
\f3msvc\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-\-swap\-even\-page\-margins
Swap left and right page margins for even\-numbered pages.
.TP 8
.B \-\-toc
Print a table of contents to the end of the output.
.TP 8
.B \-\-word\-wrap
Wrap long lines from word boundaries.
.TP 8
.B \-\-ul\-angle=\f2angle\f3
Set the angle of the underlay text to \f2angle\f1.  As a default,
the angle is \f3atan(\-d_page_h, d_page_w)\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-\-ul\-font=\f2name\f3
Select a font for the underlay text.  The default underlay font is
\f3Times-Roman200\f1.
.TP 8
.B \-\-ul\-gray=\f2num\f3
Print the underlay text with the gray value \f2num\f1 (0 ... 1), the
default gray value is .8.
.TP 8
.B \-\-ul\-position=\f2position_spec\f3
Set the underlay text's starting position according to the
\f2position_spec\f1.  The position specification must be given in
format: `\f2sign\f1 \f2xpos\f1 \f2sign\f1 \f2ypos\f1', where the
\f2sign\f1 must be `+' or `-'.  The positive dimensions are measured
from the lower left corner and the negative dimensions from the upper
right corner.  For example, the specification `+0-0' specifies the
upper left corner and `-0+0' specifies the lower right corner.
.TP 8
.B \-\-ul\-style=\f2style\f3
Set the underlay text's style to \f2style\f1.  The possible values for
\f2style\f1 are:
.RS 8
.TP 8
.B outline
print outline underlay texts (default)
.TP 8
.B filled
print filled underlay texts
.RE

.SH CONFIGURATION FILES

.B Enscript
reads configuration information from the following sources (in this
order): command line options, environment variable \f3ENSCRIPT\f1,
user's personal configuration file (\f3$HOME/.enscriptrc\f1), site
configuration file (\f3@SYSCONFDIR@/enscriptsite.cfg\f1) and system's
global configuration file (\f3@SYSCONFDIR@/enscript.cfg\f1).

The configuration files have the following format:

Empty lines and lines starting with `#' are comments.

All other lines are option lines and have format:

\f2option\f1 [\f2arguments ...\f1].

The following options can be specified:
.TP 8
.B AcceptCompositeCharacters: \f2bool\f1
Specify whether PostScript font's composite characters are accepted
as printable or if they should be considered as non-existent.  The
default value is false (0).
.TP 8
.B AFMPath: \f2path\f3
Specifies the search path for the \f2AFM\f1 files.
.TP 8
.B AppendCtrlD: \f2bool\f3
Specify if the Control-D (^D) character should be appended to the end
of the output.  The default value is false (0).
.TP 8
.B Clean7Bit: \f2bool\f3
Specify how characters greater than 127 are printed.  The valuee true
(1) generates 7-bit clean code by escaping all characters greater than
127 to the backslash-octal notation (default).  The value false (0)
generates 8-bit PostScript code leaving all characters untouched.
.TP 8
.B DefaultEncoding: \f2name\f3
Select the default input encoding.  The encoding name \f2name\f1 can
be one of the values of the option \f3\-X\f1, \f3\-\-encoding\f1.
.TP 8
.B DefaultFancyHeader: \f2name\f3
Select the default fancy header.  The default header is used when the
option \f3\-G\f1 is specified or the option \f3\-\-fancy\-header\f1 is
given without an argument.  The system\-wide default is `\f3enscript\f1'.
.TP 8
.B DefaultMedia: \f2name\f3
Select the default output media.
.TP 8
.B DefaultOutputMethod: \f2method\f3
Select the default target to which the generated output is sent.
The possible values for the \f2method\f1 are:
.RS 8
.TP 8
.B printer
send output to printer (default)
.TP 8
.B stdout
send output to \f3stdout\f1
.RE
.TP 8
.B DownloadFont: \f2fontname\f3
Include the font description file of the font \f2fontname\f1 to the
generated output.
.TP 8
.B EscapeChar: \f2num\f3
Specify the escape character for the special escapes.  The default
value is 0.
.TP 8
.B FormFeedType: \f2type\f3
Specify what to do when a formfeed character is encountered from the
input.  The possible values for \f2type\f1 are:
.RS 8
.TP 8
.B column
move to the beginning of the next column (default)
.TP 8
.B page
move to the beginning of the next page
.RE
.TP 8
.B GeneratePageSize: \f2bool\f3
Specify whether the \f3PageSize\f1 page device setting is generated to
the PostScript output.  The default value is true (1).
.TP 8
.B HighlightBarGray: \f2gray\f3
Specify the gray level which is used to print the highlight bars.
.TP 8
.B HighlightBars: \f2num\f3
Specify how high the highlight bars are in lines.  The default value
is 0 which means that no highlight bars are printed.
.TP 8
.B LibraryPath: \f2path\f3
Specifies the \f3enscript\f1's library path that is used to lookup
various resources.  The default path is:
`@DATADIR@/enscript:\f2home\f1/.enscript'.  Where the \f2home\f1 is
the user's home directory.
.TP 8
.B MarkWrappedLines: \f2style\f3
Mark wrapped lines in the output with the style \f2style\f1.  The
possible values for the \f2format\f1 are the same which can be given
for the \f3\-\-mark\-wrapped\-lines\f1 option.
.TP 8
\f3Media: \f2name\f3 \f2width\f3 \f2height\f3 \f2llx\f3 \f2lly\f3 \f2urx\f3 \f2ury\f3
Add a new output media with the name \f2name\f1.  The physical
dimensions of the media are \f2width\f1 and \f2height\f1.  The
bounding box of the Media is specified by the points (\f2llx\f1,
\f2lly\f1) and (\f2urx\f1, \f2ury\f1).  \f3Enscript\f1 prints all
graphics inside the bounding box of the media.

User can select this media with option \f3\-M \f2name\f1.
.TP 8
.B NoJobHeaderSwitch: \f2switch\f1
Specify the spooler option to suppress the print job header page.
This option is passed to the printer spooler when the \f3enscript\f1's
option \f3\-h\f1, \f3\-\-no\-job\-header\f1 is selected.
.TP 8
.B NonPrintableFormat: \f2format\f1
Specify how the non-printable characters are printed.  The possible
values for \f2format\f1 are the same which can be given for the
\f3\-\-non\-printable\-format\f1 option.
.TP 8
.B OutputFirstLine: \f2line\f1
Set the PostScript output's first line to \f2line\f1.  The default
value is \f3PS-Adobe-3.0\f1.  Since some printers do not like DSC
levels greater than 2.0, this option can be used to change the output
first line to something more suitable like \f3%!PS-Adobe-2.0\f1 or
\f3%!\f1.
.TP 8
.B PageLabelFormat: \f2format\f1
Set the page label format to \f2format\f1.  The possible values for
\f2format\f1 are the same which can be given for the
\f3\-\-page\-label\-format\f1 option.
.TP 8
.B PagePrefeed: \f2bool\f3
Enable / disable page prefeed.  The default value is false (0).
.TP 8
.B PostScriptLevel: \f2level\f3
Set the PostScript language level, that \f3enscript\f1 uses for its
output, to \f2level\f1.  The possible values for \f2level\f1 are the
same which can be given for the \f3\-\-ps\-level\f1 option.
.TP 8
.B Printer: \f2name\f3
Names the printer to which the output is spooled.
.TP 8
.B QueueParam: \f2name\f3
The spooler command switch to select the printer queue, e.g. \f3\-P\f1
in \f3lpr \-Pps\f1.  This option can also be used to pass other flags
to the spooler command.  These options must be given before the queue
switch.
.TP 8
.B SetPageDevice: \f2key\f1[\f3:\f2value\f1]\f3
Pass a page device definition to the generated PostScript output.
.TP 8
.B Spooler: \f2name\f3
Names the printer spooler command.  \f3Enscript\f1 pipes generated
PostScript to the command \f2name\f1.
.TP 8
.B StatesBinary: \f2path\f3
Define an absolute path to the \f3states\f1 program.
.TP 8
.B StatesColor: \f2bool\f3
Should the \f3states\f1 program generate color outputs.
.TP 8
.B StatesConfigFile: \f2file\f3
Read highlighting states configuration from the file \f2file\f1.  The
default config file is `@DATADIR@/enscript/hl/enscript.st'.
.TP 8
.B StatesHighlightStyle: \f2style\f3
Set the highlight style to \f2style\f1.
.TP 8
.B StatesPath: \f2path\f3
Define the path for the \f3states\f1 program.  The \f3states\f1
program will lookup its state definition files from this path.  The
default value is `$HOME/.enscript:@DATADIR@/enscript/hl'.
.TP 8
.B StatusDict: \f2key\f1[\f3:\f2value\f1]\f3
Pass a statusdict definition to the generated PostScript output.
.TP 8
.B TOCFormat: \f2format\f3
Format table of contents entries with the format string \f2format\f1.
The format string \f2format\f1 can contain the same escapes which are
used to format header strings with the `%Format' special comment.
.TP 8
.B Underlay: \f2text\f3
Print string \f2text\f1 under every page.
.TP 8
.B UnderlayAngle: \f2num\f3
Set the angle of the underlay text to \f2num\f1.
.TP 8
.B UnderlayFont: \f2fontspec\f3
Select a font for the underlay text.
.TP 8
.B UnderlayGray: \f2num\f3
Print the underlay text with the gray value \f2num\f1.
.TP 8
.B UnderlayPosition: \f2position_spec\f3
Set the underlay text's starting position according to the
\f2position_spec\f1.
.TP 8
.B UnderlayStyle: \f2style\f3
Set the underlay text's style to \f2style\f1.

.SH FANCY HEADERS

Users can create their own fancy headers by creating a header
description file and placing it in a directory which is in
\f3enscript\f1's library path.  The name of the header file must be in
format: `\f2headername\f1.hdr'.  Header can be selected by giving
option: \f3\-\-fancy\-header=\f2headername\f1.

Header description file contains PostScript code that paints the
header.  Description file must provide procedure \f3do_header\f1 which
is called by \f3enscript\f1 at the beginning of every page.

Header description file contains two parts: comments and code.  Parts
are separated by a line containing text:

% \-\- code follows this line \-\-

.B Enscript
copies only the code part of description file to the generated
PostScript output.  The comments part can contain any data, it is not
copied.  If separator line is missing, no data is copied to output.

.B Enscript
defines following constants which can be used in header description
files:
.TP 16
.B  d_page_w
page width
.TP 16
.B  d_page_h
page height
.TP 16
.B  d_header_x
header lower left \f2x\f1 coordinate
.TP 16
.B  d_header_y
header lower left \f2y\f1 coordinate
.TP 16
.B  d_header_w
header width
.TP 16
.B  d_header_h
header height
.TP 16
.B d_footer_x
footer lower left \f2x\f1 coordinate
.TP 16
.B d_footer_y
footer lower left \f2y\f1 coordinate
.TP 16
.B d_footer_w
footer width
.TP 16
.B d_footer_h
footer height
.TP 16
.B  d_output_w
width of the text output area
.TP 16
.B  d_output_h
height of the text output area
.TP 16
.B  user_header_p
predicate which tells if user has defined his/her own header string:
\f3true\f1/\f3false\f1
.TP 16
.B  user_header_left_str
if \f3user_header_p\f1 is \f3true\f1, this is the left field of the
user supplied header string.
.TP 16
.B user_header_center_str
if \f3user_header_p\f1 is \f3true\f1, this is the center field of the
user supplied header string
.TP 16
.B user_header_right_str
if \f3user_header_p\f1 is \f3true\f1, this is the right field of the
user supplied header string
.TP 16
.B  user_footer_p
predicate which tells if user has defined his/her own footer string:
\f3true\f1/\f3false\f1
.TP 16
.B  user_footer_left_str
if \f3user_footer_p\f1 is \f3true\f1, this is the left field of the
user supplied footer string.
.TP 16
.B user_footer_center_str
if \f3user_footer_p\f1 is \f3true\f1, this is the center field of the
user supplied footer string
.TP 16
.B user_footer_right_str
if \f3user_footer_p\f1 is \f3true\f1, this is the right field of the
user supplied footer string
.TP 16
.B  HF
standard header font (from \f3\-F\f1, \f3\-\-header\-font\f1 option).
This can be selected simply by invoking command: `\f3HF setfont\f1'.
.TP 16
.B pagenum
the number of the current page
.TP 16
.B fname
the full name of the printed file (/foo/bar.c)
.TP 16
.B fdir
the directory part of the file name (/foo)
.TP 16
.B ftail
file name without the directory part (bar.c)
.TP 16
.B gs_languagelevel
PostScript interpreter's language level (currently 1 or 2)
.P

You can also use the following special comments to customize your
headers and to specify some extra options.  Special comments are like
DSC comments but they start with a single `%' character; special
comments start from the beginning of the line and they have the
following syntax:

%\f2commentname\f1: \f2options\f1

Currently \f3enscript\f1 support the following special comments:
.TP 8
.B %Format: \f2name\f3 \f2format\f3
Define a new string constant \f2name\f1 according to the format string
\f2format\f1.  Format string start from the first non-space character
and it ends to the end of the line.  Format string can contain general
`%' escapes and input file related `$' escapes.  Currently following
escapes are supported:
.RS 8
.TP 8
.B %%
character `%'
.TP 8
.B $$
character `$'
.TP 8
.B $%
current page number
.TP 8
.B $=
number of pages in the current file
.TP 8
.B $p
number of pages processed so far
.TP 8
.B $(\f2VAR\f3)
value of the environment variable \f2VAR\f1.
.TP 8
.B %c
trailing component of the current working directory
.TP 8
.B %C \f1(\f3$C\f1)\f3
current time (file modification time) in `hh:mm:ss' format
.TP 8
.B %d
current working directory
.TP 8
.B %D \f1(\f3$D\f1)\f3
current date (file modification date) in `yy-mm-dd' format
.TP 8
.B %D{\f2string\f3} \f1(\f3$D{\f2string\f3}\f1)\f3
format string \f2string\f1 with the strftime(3) function.
`\f3%D{}\f1' refers to the current date and `\f3$D{}\f1' to the input
file's last modification date.
.TP 8
.B %E \f1(\f3$E\f1)\f3
current date (file modification date) in `yy/mm/dd' format
.TP 8
.B %F \f1(\f3$F\f1)\f3
current date (file modification date) in `dd.mm.yyyy' format
.TP 8
.B %H
document title
.TP 8
.B $L
number of lines in the current input file.  This is valid only for the
toc entries, it can't be used in header strings.
.TP 8
.B %m
the hostname up to the first `.' character
.TP 8
.B %M
the full hostname
.TP 8
.B %n
the user login name
.TP 8
.B $n
input file name without the directory part
.TP 8
.B %N
the user's pw_gecos field up to the first `,' character
.TP 8
.B $N
the full input file name
.TP 8
.B %t \f1(\f3$t\f1)\f3
current time (file modification time) in 12-hour am/pm format
.TP 8
.B %T \f1(\f3$T\f1)\f3
current time (file modification time) in 24-hour format `hh:mm'
.TP 8
.B %* \f1(\f3$*\f1)\f3
current time (file modification time) in 24-hour format with seconds
`hh:mm:ss'
.TP 8
.B $v
the sequence number of the current input file
.TP 8
.B $V
the sequence number of the current input file in the `Table of
Contents' format: if the \f3\-\-toc\f1 option is given, escape expands
to `\f2num\f1\-'; if the \f3\-\-toc\f1 is not given, escape expands to
an empty string.
.TP 8
.B %W \f1(\f3$W\f1)\f3
current date (file modification date) in `mm/dd/yy' format
.RE

.RS 8
All format directives except `$=' can also be given in format

\f2escape\f1 \f2width\f1 \f2directive\f1

where \f2width\f1 specifies the width of the column to which the
escape is printed.  For example, escape "$5%" will expand to something
like " 12".  If the width is negative, the value will be printed
left-justified.

For example, the `emacs.hdr' defines its date string with the
following format comment:

.B %Format: eurdatestr %E

which expands to:

.B /eurdatestr (96/01/08) def
.RE
.P
.TP 8
.B %HeaderHeight: \f2height\f1
Allocate \f2height\f1 points space for the page header.  The default
header height is 36 points.
.TP 8
.B %FooterHeight: \f2height\f1
Allocate \f2height\f1 points space for the page footer.  The default
footer height is 0 points.
.P

According to Adobe's Document Structuring Conventions (DSC), all
resources needed by a document must be listed in document's prolog.
Since user's can create their own headers, \f3enscript\f1 don't know
what resources those headers use.  That's why all headers must contain
a standard DSC comment that lists all needed resources.  For example,
used fonts can be listed with following comment:

%%DocumentNeededResources: font \f2fontname1\f1 \f2fontname2\f1

Comment can be continued to the next line with the standard
continuation comment:

%%+ font \f2fontname3\f1

.SH SPECIAL ESCAPES

\f3Enscript\f1 supports special escape sequences which can be used to
add some page formatting commands to ASCII documents.  As a default,
special escapes interpretation is off, so all ASCII files print out as
everyone expects.  Special escapes interpretation is activated by
giving option \f3\-e\f1, \f3\-\-escapes\f1 to \f3enscript\f1.

All special escapes start with the escape character.  The default
escape character is ^@ (octal 000); escape character can be changed
with option \f3\-e\f1, \f3\-\-escapes\f1.  Escape character is
followed by escape's name and optional options and arguments.

Currently \f3enscript\f1 supports following escapes:
.TP 8
.B bgcolor
change the text background color.  The syntax of the escape is:

^@bgcolor{\f2red\f1 \f2green\f1 \f2blue\f1}

where the color components \f2red\f1, \f2green\f1, and \f1blue\f1 are
given as decimal numbers between values 0 and 1.

.TP 8
.B bggray
change the text background color.  The syntax of the escape is:

^@bggray{\f2gray\f1}

where \f2gray\f1 is the new text background gray value.  The default
value is 1.0 (white).
.TP 8
.B color
change the text color.  The syntax of the escape is:

^@color{\f2red\f1 \f2green\f1 \f2blue\f1}

where color components \f2red\f1, \f2green\f1 and \f2blue\f1 are given
as decimal numbers between values 0 and 1.
.TP 8
.B comment
comment the rest of the line including the newline character.
Escape's syntax is:

^@comment \f2text\f1 \f2newline_character\f1
.TP 8
.B escape
change the escape character.  The syntax of the escape is:

^@escape{\f2code\f1}

where \f2code\f1 is the decimal code of the new escape character.
.TP 8
.B epsf
inline EPS file to the document.  The syntax of the escape is:

^@epsf[\f2options\f1]{\f2filename\f1}

where \f2options\f1 is an optional sequence of option characters and
values enclosed with brackets and \f2filename\f1 is the name of the
EPS file.

If \f2filename\f1 ends to the `|' character, then \f2filename\f1 is
assumed to name a command that prints EPS data to its standard output.
In this case, \f3enscript\f1 opens a pipe to the specified command
and reads EPS data from pipe.

Following options can be given for the \f3epsf\f1 escape:
.RS 8
.TP 8
.B c
print image centered
.TP 8
.B r
print image right justified
.TP 8
.B n
do not update current point.  Following output is printed to that
position where the current point was just before the \f3epsf\f1 escape
.TP 8
.B nx
do not update current point \f2x\f1 coordinate
.TP 8
.B ny
do not update current point \f2y\f1 coordinate
.TP 8
.B x\f2num\f3
move image's top left \f2x\f1 coordinate \f2num\f1 characters from
current point \f2x\f1 coordinate (relative position)
.TP 8
.B x\f2num\f3a
set image's top left \f2x\f1 coordinate to column \f2num\f1 (absolute
position)
.TP 8
.B y\f2num\f3
move image's top left \f2y\f1 coordinate \f2num\f1 lines from current
line (relative position)
.TP 8
.B y\f2num\f3a
set image's top left \f2y\f1 coordinate to line \f2num\f1 (absolute
position)
.TP 8
.B h\f2num\f3
set image's height to \f2num\f1 lines
.TP 8
.B s\f2num\f3
scale image with factor \f2num\f1
.TP 8
.B sx\f2num\f3
scale image in \f2x\f1 direction with factor \f2num\f1
.TP 8
.B sy\f2num\f3
scale image in \f2y\f1 direction with factor \f2num\f1
.P
As a default, all dimensions are given in lines (vertical) and
characters (horizontal).  You can also specify other units by
appending an unit specifier after number.  Possible unit specifiers
and the corresponding units are:
.TP 8
.B c
centimeters
.TP 8
.B i
inches
.TP 8
.B l
lines or characters (default)
.TP 8
.B p
PostScript points
.P
For example to print an image one inch high, you can specify height by
following options: \f3h1i\f1 (1 inch), \f3h2.54c\f1 (2.54 cm),
\f3h72p\f1 (72 points).
.RE
.TP 8
.B font
select current font.  The syntax of the escape is:

^@font{\f2fontname\f1[:\f2encoding\f1]}

where \f2fontname\f1 is a standard font specification.  Special font
specification \f3default\f1 can be used to select the default body
font (\f3enscript\f1's default or the one specified by the command
line option \f3\-f\f1, \f3\-\-font\f1).

The optional argument \f2encoding\f1 specifies the encoding that
should be used for the new font.  Currently the encoding can only be
the \f3enscript\f1's global input encoding or \f3ps\f1.
.TP 8
.B ps
include raw PostScript code to the output.  The syntax of the escape
is:

^@ps{\f2code\f1}
.TP 8
.B shade
highlight regions of text by changing the text background color.
Escape's syntax is:

^@shade{\f2gray\f1}

where \f2gray\f1 is the new text background gray value.  The default
value is 1.0 (white) which disables highlighting.

.SH PAGE DEVICE OPTIONS

Page device is a PostScript level 2 feature that offers an uniform
interface to control printer's output device.  \f3Enscript\f1
protects all page device options inside an if block so they have no
effect in level 1 interpreters.  Although all level 2 interpreters
support page device, they do not have to support all page device
options.  For example some printers can print in duplex mode and some
can not.  Refer to the documentation of your printer for supported
options.

Here are some usable page device options which can be selected with
the \f3\-D\f1, \f3\-\-setpagedevice\f1 option.  For a complete listing,
see \f2PostScript Language Reference Manual\f1: section 4.11 Device
Setup.
.TP 8
.B Collate \f2boolean\f1
how output is organized when printing multiple copies
.TP 8
.B Duplex \f2boolean\f1
duplex (two side) printing
.TP 8
.B ManualFeed \f2boolean\f1
manual feed paper tray
.TP 8
.B OutputFaceUp \f2boolean\f1
print output `face up' or `face down'
.TP 8
.B Tumble \f2boolean\f1
how opposite sides are positioned in duplex printing

.SH PRINTING EXAMPLES

Following printing examples assume that \f3enscript\f1 uses the
default configuration.  If default actions have been changed from the
configuration files, some examples will behave differently.
.TP 8
.B enscript foo.txt
Print file \f3foo.txt\f1 to the default printer.
.TP 8
.B enscript \-Possu foo.txt
Print file \f3foo.txt\f1 to printer \f3ossu\f1.
.TP 8
.B enscript \-pfoo.ps foo.txt
Print file \f3foo.txt\f1, but leave PostScript output to file
\f3foo.ps\f1.
.TP 8
.B enscript \-2 foo.txt
Print file \f3foo.txt\f1 to two columns.
.TP 8
.B enscript \-2r foo.txt
Print file to two columns and rotate output 90 degrees (landscape).
.TP 8
.B enscript \-DDuplex:true foo.txt
Print file in duplex (two side) mode (printer dependent).
.TP 8
.B enscript \-G2rE \-U2 foo.c
My default code printing command: gaudy header, two columns,
landscape, code highlighting, 2-up printing.
.TP 8
\f3enscript \-E \-\-color \-Whtml \-\-toc -pfoo.html *.h *.c\f1
A nice HTML report of your project's C source files.

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

The environment variable \f3ENSCRIPT\f1 can be used to pass default
options for \f3enscript\f1.  For example, to select the default body
font to be Times\-Roman 7pt, set the following value to the
\f3ENSCRIPT\f1 environment variable:
.TP 8
.B \-fTimes\-Roman7
.P

The value of the \f3ENSCRIPT\f1 variable is processed before the
command line options, so command line options can be used to overwrite
these defaults.

Variable \f3ENSCRIPT_LIBRARY\f1 specifies the \f3enscript\f1's
library directory.  It can be used to overwrite the build-in default
`@DATADIR@/enscript'.

.SH RETURN VALUE

\f3Enscript\f1 returns value 1 to the shell if any errors were
encountered or 0 otherwise.  If the option
\f3\-\-extended\-return\-values\f1 was specified, the return value is
constructed from the following flags:
.TP 8
.B 0
no errors or warnings
.TP 8
.B 2
some lines were truncated or wrapped
.TP 8
.B 4
some characters were missing from the used fonts
.TP 8
.B 8
some characters were unprintable

.SH FILES

.nf
.ta 4i
@DATADIR@/enscript/*.hdr		header files
@DATADIR@/enscript/*.enc		input encoding vectors
@DATADIR@/enscript/enscript.pro	PostScript prolog
@DATADIR@/enscript/afm/*.afm		AFM files for PostScript fonts
@DATADIR@/enscript/font.map	index for the AFM files
@DATADIR@/enscript/hl/*.st	states definition files
@SYSCONFDIR@/enscript.cfg		system\-wide configuration file
@SYSCONFDIR@/enscriptsite.cfg		site configuration file
~/.enscriptrc				personal configuration file
~/.enscript/				personal resource directory
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
diffpp(1), ghostview(1), gs(1), lpq(1), lpr(1), lprm(1), states(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Markku Rossi <mtr@iki.fi> <http://www.iki.fi/~mtr/>

GNU Enscript WWW home page: <http://www.iki.fi/~mtr/genscript/>
