.\"
.TH ZSHOPTIONS 1 "June 26, 1996" "zsh version 3.0"
.SH NAME
zshoptions \- zsh options
.SH "SPECIFYING OPTIONS"
Options are primarily referred to by name.
These names are case insensitive and underscores are ignored.
For example, "allexport" is equivalent to "A__lleXP_ort".
.PP
The sense of an option name may be inverted by preceding it with "no",
so "setopt No_Beep" is equivalent to "setopt beep".
This inversion can only be done once, so "nonobeep" is
.I not
a synonym for "beep".
Similarly, "tify" is not a synonym for "nonotify"
(the inversion of "notify").
.PP
Some options also have one or more single letter names.
There are two sets of single letter options: one used by default,
and another when the shell is emulating sh or ksh.
The single letter options can be used on the shell command line,
or with the
.BR set ", " setopt " and " unsetopt
builtins, as normal Unix options preceded by
.BR \- .
.PP
The sense of the single letter options may be inverted by using
.B +
instead of
.BR \- .
Some of the single letter option names refer to an option being off,
in which case the inversion of that name refers to the option being on.
For example, "+n" is the short name of "exec", and "\-n" is the short name
of its inversion, "noexec".
.SH DESCRIPTIONS
.RS
.TP
\fBALL_EXPORT\fP (\-\fBa\fP, ksh: \-\fBa\fP)
All parameters subsequently defined are automatically exported.
.TP
\fBALWAYS_LAST_PROMPT\fP
If unset, key functions that list completions try to return to the last
prompt if given a numeric argument. If set these functions try to
return to the last prompt if given \fBno\fP numeric argument.
.TP
\fBALWAYS_TO_END\fP
If a completion with the cursor in the word was started and it results
in only one match, the cursor is placed at the end of the word.
.TP
\fBAPPEND_HISTORY\fP
If this is set, zsh sessions will append their history list to
the history file, rather than overwrite it. Thus, multiple parallel
zsh sessions will all have their history lists added to the
history file, in the order they are killed.
.TP
\fBAUTO_CD\fP (\-\fBJ\fP)
If a command is not in the hash table, and there exists an
executable directory by that name, perform the \fBcd\fP
command to that directory.
.TP
\fBAUTO_LIST\fP (\-\fB9\fP)
Automatically list choices on an ambiguous completion.
.TP
\fBAUTO_MENU\fP
Automatically use menu completion after the second consecutive request for
completion, for example by pressing the \fPTAB\fP key repeatedly. This option
is overridden by \fBMENU_COMPLETE\fP.
.TP
\fBAUTO_NAME_DIRS
Any parameter that is set to the absolute name of a directory
immediately becomes a name for that directory in the usual form
~param.  If this option is not set, the parameter must be used in that
form for it to become a name (a command-line completion is sufficient
for this).
.TP
\fBAUTO_PARAM_KEYS\fP
If a parameter name was completed and the next character typed is one
of those that have to come directly after the name (like `}', `:',
etc.) they are placed there automatically.
.TP
\fBAUTO_PARAM_SLASH\fP
If a parameter is completed whose content is the name of a directory,
then add a trailing slash.
.TP
\fBAUTO_PUSHD\fP (\-\fBN\fP)
Make \fBcd\fP push the old directory onto the directory stack.
.TP
\fBAUTO_REMOVE_SLASH\fP
When the last character resulting from a completion is a slash and the next
character typed is a word delimiter, remove the slash.
.TP
\fBAUTO_RESUME\fP (\-\fBW\fP)
Treat single word simple commands without redirection
as candidates for resumption of an existing job.
.TP
\fBBAD_PATTERN\fP (+\fB2\fP)
If a pattern for filename generation is badly formed,
print an error.
If this option is unset, the pattern will be left unchanged.
.TP
\fBBANG_HIST\fP (+\fBK\fP)
Perform textual history substitution, treating the character \fB!\fP specially.
.TP
\fBBEEP\fP (+\fBB\fP)
Beep.
.TP
\fBBG_NICE\fP (\-\fB6\fP)
Run all background jobs at a lower priority.  This option
is set by default.
.TP
\fBBRACE_CCL\fP
Expand expressions in braces which would not otherwise undergo brace
expansion to a lexically ordered list of all the characters.  See the
section \fBBRACE EXPANSION\fP in the \fBzshexpn\fP manual page.
.TP
\fBBSD_ECHO\fP
Make the \fBecho\fP builtin compatible with the BSD \fBecho\fP(1) command.
This disables backslashed escape sequences in echo strings unless the
-\fBe\fP option is specified.
.TP
\fBCDABLE_VARS\fP (\-\fBT\fP)
If the argument to a \fBcd\fP command (or an implied \fBcd\fP with the
\fBAUTO_CD\fP option set) is not a directory, and does not begin with a
slash, try to expand the expression as if it were preceded by a ~ (see
\fBFilename Expansion\fP above).
.TP
\fBCHASE_LINKS\fP (\-\fBw\fP)
Resolve symbolic links to their true values.
.TP
\fBCLOBBER\fP (+\fBC\fP, ksh: +\fBC\fP)
Allows \fB>\fP redirection to truncate existing files,
and \fB>>\fP to create files.
Otherwise \fB>!\fP must be used to truncate a file,
and \fB>>!\fP to create a file.
.TP
\fBCOMPLETE_ALIASES\fP
If set, aliases on the command line are not internally substituted
before completion is attempted.
.TP
\fBCOMPLETE_IN_WORD\fP
If unset, the cursor is set to the end of the word if completion is
started. Otherwise it stays there and completion is done from both ends.
.TP
\fBCORRECT\fP (\-\fB0\fP)
Try to correct the spelling of commands.
.TP
\fBCORRECT_ALL\fP (\-\fBO\fP)
Try to correct the spelling of all arguments in a line.
.TP
\fBCSH_JUNKIE_HISTORY\fP
A history reference without an event specifier will always refer to the
previous command.
.TP
\fBCSH_JUNKIE_LOOPS\fP
Allow loop bodies to take the form
"\fIlist\fP; \fBend\fP" instead of
"\fBdo\fP \fIlist\fP; \fBdone\fP".
.TP
\fBCSH_JUNKIE_QUOTES\fP
Complain if a quoted expression runs off the end of a line;
prevent quoted expressions from containing unescaped newlines.
.TP
\fBCSH_NULL_GLOB\fP
If a pattern for filename generation has no matches,
delete the pattern from the argument list;
do not report an error unless all the patterns
in a command have no matches.
Overrides \fBNULL_GLOB\fP.
.TP
\fBEQUALS\fP
Perform \fB=\fP filename substitution.
.TP
\fBERR_EXIT\fP (\-\fBe\fP, ksh: \-\fBe\fP)
If a command has a non-zero exit status, execute the \fBZERR\fP
trap, if set, and exit.  This is disabled while running initialization
scripts.
.TP
\fBEXEC\fP (+\fBn\fP, ksh: +\fBn\fP)
Do execute commands.  Without this option, commands are
read and checked for syntax errors, but not executed.
.TP
\fBEXTENDED_GLOB\fP
Treat the #, ~ and ^ characters as part of patterns for filename
generation, etc.  (An initial unquoted ~ always produces named
directory expansion as in \fBFilename Expansion\fP above.)
.TP
\fBEXTENDED_HISTORY\fP
Save beginning and ending timestamps to the history file.
The format of these timestamps is
\fI:<beginning time>:<ending time>:<command>.\fP
.TP
\fBFLOW_CONTROL\fP
If this option is unset,
output flow control via start/stop characters (usually assigned to
^S/^Q) is disabled in the shell's editor.
.TP
\fBFUNCTION_ARGZERO\fP
When executing a shell function or sourcing a script, set $0
temporarily to the name of the function/script.
.TP
\fBGLOB\fP (+\fBF\fP, ksh: +\fBf\fP)
Perform filename generation.
.TP
\fBGLOB_ASSIGN\fP
If this option is set, \fIfilename generation\fP (globbing) is
performed on the right hand side of scalar parameter assignments of
the form \fIname\fB=\fIpattern\fB (e.g. `param=*'). If the result has
more than one word the parameter will become an array with those words
as arguments. This option is provided for backwards compatibility
only: globbing is always performed on the right hand side of array
assignments of the form `\fIname\fB=( \fIvalue\fB )\fR'
(e.g. `param=(*)') and this form is recommended for clarity;  with this
option set, it is not possible to predict whether the result will be
an array or a scalar.
.TP
\fBGLOB_COMPLETE\fP
When the current word has a glob pattern, do not insert all the words
resulting from the expansion but generate matches as for completion and
cycle through them like \fBMENU_COMPLETE\fP. The matches are generated
as if a `*' was added to the end of the word, or inserted at the
cursor when \fBCOMPLETE_IN_WORD\fP is set.  This actually uses pattern
matching, not globbing, so it works not only for files but for any
completion, such as options, user names, etc.
.TP
\fBGLOB_DOTS\fP (\-\fB4\fP)
Do not require a leading . in a filename to be matched explicitly.
.TP
\fBGLOB_SUBST\fP
Treat any characters resulting from parameter substitution as being
eligible for file expansion and filename generation, and any
characters resulting from command substitution as being eligible for
filename generation.
.TP
\fBHASH_CMDS\fP
Place the location of each command in the hash table the first
time it is executed.  If this option is unset, no path hashing
will be done at all.
.TP
\fBHASH_DIRS\fP
Whenever a command is executed, hash the directory containing it,
as well as all directories that occur earlier in the path.
Has no effect if \fBHASH_CMDS\fP is unset.
.TP
\fBHASH_LIST_ALL\fP
Whenever a command completion is attempted, make sure the entire
command path is hashed first.  This makes the first completion slower.
.TP
\fBHIST_ALLOW_CLOBBER\fP
Add `|' to output redirections in the history.  This allows history
references to clobber files even when \fBCLOBBER\fP is unset.
.TP
\fBHIST_BEEP\fP
Beep when an attempt is made to access a history entry which
isn't there.
.TP
\fBHIST_IGNORE_DUPS\fP (\-\fBh\fP)
Do not enter command lines into the history list
if they are duplicates of the previous event.
.TP
\fBHIST_IGNORE_SPACE\fP (\-\fBg\fP)
Do not enter command lines into the history list
if any command on the line begins with a blank.
.TP
\fBHIST_NO_STORE\fP
Remove the \fBhistory\fP (\fBfc\fP \-\fBl\fP) command from
the history when invoked.
.TP
\fBHIST_REDUCE_BLANKS\fP
Remove superfluous whitespace from each command line
being added to the history list.
.TP
\fBHIST_VERIFY\fP
Whenever the user enters a line with history substitution,
don't execute the line directly; instead, perform
history substitution and reload the line into the editing buffer.
.TP
\fBHUP\fP
Send the \fBHUP\fP signal to running jobs when the
shell exits.
.TP
\fBIGNORE_BRACES\fP (\-\fBI\fP)
Do not perform brace expansion.
.TP
\fBIGNORE_EOF\fP (\-\fB7\fP)
Do not exit on end-of-file.  Require the use
of \fBexit\fP or \fBlogout\fP instead.
.TP
\fBINTERACTIVE\fP (\-\fBi\fP, ksh: \-\fBi\fP)
This is an interactive shell.  This option is set upon initialisation if
the standard input is a tty and commands are being read from standard input.
(See the discussion of
.BR SHIN_STDIN .)
This heuristic may be overridden by specifying a state for this option
on the command line.
The value of this option cannot be changed anywhere other than the command line.
.TP
\fBINTERACTIVE_COMMENTS\fP (\-\fBk\fP)
Allow comments even in interactive shells.
.TP
\fBKSH_ARRAYS\fP
Emulate \fIksh\fP array handling as closely as possible. If this option
is set, array elements are numbered from zero, an array parameter
without subscript refers to the first element instead of the whole array,
and braces are required to delimit a subscript (``${path[2]}'' rather
than just ``$path[2]'').
.TP
\fBKSH_OPTION_PRINT\fP
Alters the way options settings are printed.
.TP
\fBLIST_AMBIGUOUS\fP
If this option is set, completions are shown only if the completions
don't have a unambiguous prefix or suffix that could be inserted in
the command line.
.TP
\fBLIST_BEEP\fP
Beep on an ambiguous completion.
.TP
\fBLIST_TYPES\fP (\-\fBX\fP)
When listing files that are possible completions, show the
type of each file with a trailing identifying mark.
.TP
\fBLOCAL_OPTIONS\fP
If this option is set at the point of return from a shell function,
all the options (including this one) which were in force upon entry to
the function are restored.  Otherwise, only this option and the
\fBXTRACE\fP and \fBPRINT_EXIT_VALUE\fP options are restored.  Hence
if this is explicitly unset by a shell function the other options in
force at the point of return will remain so.
.TP
\fBLOGIN\fP (\-\fBl\fP, ksh: \-\fBl\fP)
This is a login shell.
.TP
\fBLONG_LIST_JOBS\fP (\-\fBR\fP)
List jobs in the long format by default.
.TP
\fBMAGIC_EQUAL_SUBST\fP
All unquoted arguments of the form \fIidentifier\fB=\fIexpression\fR
appearing after the command name have filename expansion (that is,
where \fIexpression\fR has a leading `~' or `=') performed on
\fIexpression\fR as if it were a parameter assignment. The argument is
not otherwise treated specially: in other words, it is subsequently
treated as a single word, not as an assignment.
.TP
\fBMAIL_WARNING\fP (\-\fBU\fP)
Print a warning message if a mail file has been
accessed since the shell last checked.
.TP
\fBMARK_DIRS\fP (\-\fB8\fP, ksh: \-\fBX\fP)
Append a trailing / to all directory
names resulting from filename generation (globbing).
.TP
\fBMENU_COMPLETE\fP (\-\fBY\fP)
On an ambiguous completion, instead of listing possibilities or beeping,
insert the first match immediately.  Then when completion is requested
again, remove the first match and insert the second match, etc.
When there are no more matches, go back to the first one again.
\fBreverse-menu-complete\fP may be used to loop through the list
in the other direction. This option overrides \fBAUTO_MENU\fP.
.TP
\fBMONITOR\fP (\-\fBm\fP, ksh: \-\fBm\fP)
Allow job control.  Set by default in interactive shells.
.TP
\fBMULTIOS\fP
Perform implicit \fBtee\fPs or \fBcat\fPs when multiple
redirections are attempted (see the \fBREDIRECTION\fP section).
.TP
\fBNOMATCH\fP (+\fB3\fP)
If a pattern for filename generation has no matches,
print an error, instead of
leaving it unchanged in the argument list.
This also applies to file expansion 
of an initial ~ or =.
.TP
\fBNOTIFY\fP (\-\fB5\fP, ksh: \-\fBb\fP)
Report the status of background jobs immediately, rather than
waiting until just before printing a prompt.
.TP
\fBNULL_GLOB\fP (\-\fBG\fP)
If a pattern for filename generation has no matches,
delete the pattern from the argument list instead
of reporting an error.  Overrides \fBNOMATCH\fP.
.TP
\fBNUMERIC_GLOB_SORT\fP
If numeric filenames are matched by a filename generation pattern,
sort the filenames numerically rather than lexicographically.
.TP
\fBOVER_STRIKE\fP
Start up the line editor in overstrike mode.
.TP
\fBPATH_DIRS\fP (\-\fBQ\fP)
Perform a path search even on command names with slashes in them.
Thus if "/usr/local/bin" is in the user's path, and he types
"X11/xinit", the command "/usr/local/bin/X11/xinit" will be executed
(assuming it exists).
This applies to the \fB\&.\fP builtin as well as to command execution.
Commands explicitly beginning with "./" or "../" are not subject to
path search.
.TP
\fBPOSIX_BUILTINS\fP
When this option is set the \fBcommand\fP builtin can be used to execute
shell builtin commands.  Parameter assignments specified before shell
functions and special builtins are kept after the command completes unless
the special builtin is prefixed with the \fBcommand\fP builtin.  Special
builtins are
.BR . ,
.BR : ,
.BR break ,
.BR continue ,
.BR declare ,
.BR eval ,
.BR exit ,
.BR export ,
.BR integer ,
.BR local ,
.BR readonly ,
.BR return ,
.BR set ,
.BR shift ,
.BR source ,
.BR times ,
.BR trap " and"
.BR unset .
.TP
\fBPRINT_EIGHT_BIT\fP
Print eight bit characters literally in completion lists, etc.
This option is not necessary if your system correctly returns the
printability of eight bit characters (see ctype(3)).
.TP
\fBPRINT_EXIT_VALUE\fP (\-\fB1\fP)
Print the exit value of programs with non-zero exit status.
.TP
\fBPRIVILEGED\fP (\-\fBp\fP, ksh: \-\fBp\fP)
Turn on privileged mode. This is enabled automatically on startup if the
effective user (group) id is not equal to the real user (group) id. Turning
this option off causes the effective user and group ids to be set to the
real user and group ids. This option disables sourcing user startup files.
If \fIzsh\fP is invoked as \fIsh\fP or \fIksh\fP with this option set,
\fB/etc/suid_profile\fP is sourced (after \fB/etc/profile\fP on interactive
shells). Sourcing \fB~/.profile\fP is disabled and the contents of the
\fBENV\fP variable is ignored. This option cannot be changed using the
\-\fBm\fP option of \fBsetopt\fP and \fBunsetopt\fP and changing it inside a
function always changes it globally regardless of the \fBLOCAL_OPTIONS\fP
option.
.TP
\fBPROMPT_CR\fP (+\fBV\fP)
Print a carriage return just before printing
a prompt in the line editor.
.TP
\fBPROMPT_SUBST\fP
If set, \fIparameter expansion\fP, \fIcommand substitution\fP and
\fIarithmetic expansion\fP is performed in prompts.
.TP
\fBPUSHD_IGNORE_DUPS\fP
Don't push multiple copies of the same directory onto the directory stack.
.TP
\fBPUSHD_MINUS\fP
See \fBpopd\fP below.
.TP
\fBPUSHD_SILENT\fP (\-\fBE\fP)
Do not print the directory stack after \fBpushd\fP
or \fBpopd\fP.
.TP
\fBPUSHD_TO_HOME\fP (\-\fBD\fP)
Have \fBpushd\fP with no arguments act like
\fBpushd\fP $HOME.
.TP
\fBRC_EXPAND_PARAM\fP (\-\fBP\fP)
Array expansions of the form
\fIfoo\fB${\fIxx\fB}\fIbar\fR, where the parameter
\fIxx\fP is set to (\fIa b c\fP), are substituted with
\fIfooabar foobbar foocbar\fP instead of the default
\fIfooa b cbar\fP.
.TP
\fBRC_QUOTES\fP
Allow the character sequence \fB''\fP to signify a single quote
within singly quoted strings.
.TP
\fBRCS\fP (+\fBf\fP)
After /etc/zshenv is sourced on startup, source the
.zshenv, /etc/zprofile, .zprofile,
/etc/zshrc, .zshrc, /etc/zlogin, .zlogin, and .zlogout files,
as described in \fBSTARTUP/SHUTDOWN FILES\fP.
If this option is unset, only
the /etc/zshenv file is sourced.
.TP
\fBREC_EXACT\fP (\-\fBS\fP)
In completion, recognize exact matches even
if they are ambiguous.
.TP
\fBRM_STAR_SILENT\fP (\-\fBH\fP)
Do not query the user before executing "rm *" or "rm path/*".
.TP
\fBSH_FILE_EXPANSION\fP
Perform filename expansion (e.g., ~ expansion)
.I before
parateter expansion, command substitution, arithmetic expansion
and brace expansion.
If this option is unset, it is performed
.I after
brace expansion, so things like ``~$USERNAME'' ``~{pfalstad,rc}'' will work.
.TP
\fBSH_GLOB\fP
Disables the special meaning of `(', `|', `)' and '<' for globbing the
result of parameter and command substitutions,
and in some other places where
the shell accepts patterns.  This option is set if \fIzsh\fP is
invoked as \fIsh\fP or \fIksh\fP.
.TP
\fBSHIN_STDIN\fP (\-\fBs\fP, ksh: \-\fBs\fP)
Commands are being read from the standard input.
Commands are read from standard input if no command is specified with
\-\fBc\fP and no file of commands is specified.  If
.B SHIN_STDIN
is set explicitly on the command line,
any argument that would otherwise have been
taken as a file to run will instead be treated as a normal positional
parameter.
Note that setting or unsetting this option on the command line does not
necessarily affect the state the option will have while the shell is
running \- that is purely an indicator of whether on not commands are
.I actually
being read from standard input.
The value of this option cannot be changed anywhere other than the command line.
.TP
\fBSH_OPTION_LETTERS\fP
If this option is set the shell tries to interpret single letter options
(which are used with \fBset\fP and \fBsetopt\fP) like \fIksh\fP does.
This also affects the value of the \fB-\fP special parameter.
.TP
\fBSHORT_LOOPS\fP
Allow the short forms of \fBfor\fP, \fBselect\fP,
\fBif\fP, and \fBfunction\fP constructs.
.TP
\fBSH_WORD_SPLIT\fP (\-\fBy\fP)
See \fIParameter Expansion\fP.
.TP
\fBSINGLE_COMMAND\fP (\-\fBt\fP, ksh: \-\fBt\fP)
If the shell is reading from standard input, it exits after a single command
has been executed.  This also makes the shell non-interactive, unless the
.B INTERACTIVE
option is explicitly set on the command line.
The value of this option cannot be changed anywhere other than the command line.
.TP
\fBSINGLE_LINE_ZLE\fP (\-\fBM\fP)
Use single-line command line editing instead of multi-line.
.TP
\fBSUN_KEYBOARD_HACK\fP (\-\fBL\fP)
If a line ends with a backquote, and there are an odd number
of backquotes on the line, ignore the trailing backquote.
This is useful on some keyboards where the return key is
too small, and the backquote key lies annoyingly close to it.
.TP
\fBUNSET\fP (+\fBu\fP, ksh: +\fBu\fP)
Treat unset parameters as if they were empty when substituting.
Otherwise they are treated as an error.
.TP
\fBVERBOSE\fP (\-\fBv\fP, ksh: \-\fBv\fP)
Print shell input lines as they are read.
.TP
\fBXTRACE\fP (\-\fBx\fP, ksh: \-\fBx\fP)
Print commands and their arguments as they are executed.
.TP
\fBZLE\fP (\-\fBZ\fP)
Use the zsh line editor.
.RE
.SH "SINGLE LETTER OPTIONS"
Default set:
.PP
.nf
\-\fB0\fP CORRECT
\-\fB1\fP PRINT_EXIT_VALUE
+\fB2\fP BAD_PATTERN
+\fB3\fP NOMATCH
\-\fB4\fP GLOB_DOTS
\-\fB5\fP NOTIFY
\-\fB6\fP BG_NICE
\-\fB7\fP IGNORE_EOF
\-\fB8\fP MARK_DIRS
\-\fB9\fP AUTO_LIST
+\fBB\fP BEEP
+\fBC\fP CLOBBER
\-\fBD\fP PUSHD_TO_HOME
\-\fBE\fP PUSHD_SILENT
+\fBF\fP GLOB
\-\fBG\fP NULL_GLOB
\-\fBH\fP RM_STAR_SILENT
\-\fBI\fP IGNORE_BRACES
\-\fBJ\fP AUTO_CD
+\fBK\fP BANG_HIST
\-\fBL\fP SUN_KEYBOARD_HACK
\-\fBM\fP SINGLE_LINE_ZLE
\-\fBN\fP AUTO_PUSHD
\-\fBO\fP CORRECT_ALL
\-\fBP\fP RC_EXPAND_PARAM
\-\fBQ\fP PATH_DIRS
\-\fBR\fP LONG_LIST_JOBS
\-\fBS\fP REC_EXACT
\-\fBT\fP CDABLE_VARS
\-\fBU\fP MAIL_WARNING
+\fBV\fP PROMPT_CR
\-\fBW\fP AUTO_RESUME
\-\fBX\fP LIST_TYPES
\-\fBY\fP MENU_COMPLETE
\-\fBZ\fP ZLE
\-\fBa\fP ALL_EXPORT
\-\fBe\fP ERR_EXIT
+\fBf\fP RCS
\-\fBg\fP HIST_IGNORE_SPACE
\-\fBh\fP HIST_IGNORE_DUPS
\-\fBi\fP INTERACTIVE
\-\fBk\fP INTERACTIVE_COMMENTS
\-\fBl\fP LOGIN
\-\fBm\fP MONITOR
+\fBn\fP EXEC
\-\fBp\fP PRIVILEGED
\-\fBs\fP SHIN_STDIN
\-\fBt\fP SINGLE_COMMAND
+\fBu\fP UNSET
\-\fBv\fP VERBOSE
\-\fBw\fP CHASE_LINKS
\-\fBx\fP XTRACE
\-\fBy\fP SH_WORD_SPLIT
.fi
.PP
.BR sh / ksh
emulation set:
.PP
.nf
+\fBC\fP CLOBBER
\-\fBX\fP MARK_DIRS
\-\fBa\fP ALL_EXPORT
\-\fBb\fP NOTIFY
\-\fBe\fP ERR_EXIT
+\fBf\fP GLOB
\-\fBi\fP INTERACTIVE
\-\fBl\fP LOGIN
\-\fBm\fP MONITOR
+\fBn\fP EXEC
\-\fBp\fP PRIVILEGED
\-\fBs\fP SHIN_STDIN
\-\fBt\fP SINGLE_COMMAND
+\fBu\fP UNSET
\-\fBv\fP VERBOSE
\-\fBx\fP XTRACE
.fi
.PP
Also note:
.PP
.nf
\-\fBA\fP Used by \fBset\fP for setting arrays
\-\fBc\fP Used on the command line to specify a single command
\-\fBm\fP Used by \fBsetopt\fP for pattern-matching option setting
\-\fBo\fP Used in all places to allow use of long option names
.fi
.PP
Note that the use of \-\fBm\fP in
.B setopt
and
.BR unsetopt ,
allowing the specification of option names by glob patterns,
clashes with the use of \-\fBm\fP for setting the MONITOR option.
