{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf102
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset77 LucidaGrande;\f1\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica;\f2\fnil\fcharset77 LucidaGrande-Bold;
\f3\froman\fcharset77 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11560\viewh12760\viewkind0
\pard\tx0\tx1920\tx2880\tx3840\tx4800\tx5760\tx6720\tx7680\tx8640\tx9600\li1120\fi-1120\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Copyright \'a9 2003 by Apple Computer, Inc.  All Rights Reserved.\
\pard\tx960\tx1920\tx2880\tx3840\tx4800\tx5760\tx6720\tx7680\tx8640\tx9600\li1120\fi-400\ri860\ql\qnatural

\f1\fs30 \cf0 \
\pard\tx960\tx1920\tx2880\tx3840\tx4800\tx5760\tx6720\tx7680\tx8640\tx9600\li1120\fi-400\ri860\ql\qnatural

\f2\b\fs48 \cf0 PC Card Example Project\
\pard\tx960\tx1920\tx2880\tx3840\tx4800\tx5760\tx6720\tx7680\tx8640\tx9600\li960\fi-20\ri860\ql\qnatural

\f3\b0\fs28 \cf0 \
\pard\tx960\tx1920\tx2880\tx3840\tx4800\tx5760\tx6720\tx7680\tx8640\tx9600\li960\fi-20\ri-460\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 This directory contains an example project that demonstrates how to write a 16-bit PC Card Driver.  It should work with most cards.  Before you can use this driver, you will first need to need to modify it's matching information to have it match against your card.\
\
To change the cards that this sample driver will match against you will need to modify the "IOKitPersonalities" dictionary in the driver's Info.plist file.  It is best do this from Project Builder.  First go to the "Project" menu in Project Builder and select "Edit Active Target 'ApplePCCardSample'".  On the left hand side of the window, click on "Expert View" under the section "Info.plist Entries".  This will display the property list contained in the Info.Plist file for this driver.  The entry you want to change is "IOKitPersonalities".\
\
For more information on how to change these entries, please see the HeaderDoc for class IOPCCard16Device.  One way to view this is from Project Builder by going to Help > Developer Help Center > Darwin > API Reference > Device Drivers > IOPCCard16Device.\
\

\f2\b WARNING
\f0\b0 :  With this driver installed many PC Cards will match against this driver instead of the normal driver for that card.  This is due to it's high probe score.  If you need to use your PC Card socket for normal work, you should first remove this driver.\
\pard\tx960\tx4320\tx5760\tx6720\tx7680\tx8640\tx9600\li4300\fi-3360\ri-460\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx960\tx1920\tx2880\tx3840\tx4800\tx5760\tx6720\tx7680\tx8640\tx9600\li960\fi-20\ri-460\ql\qnatural
\cf0 You may incorporate sample code from these examples into your applications without restriction, although the sample code has been provided "as is" and the responsibility for its operation is completely yours. However, you should not redistribute the source as "Apple Sample Code" if you make changes to it. If you're going to re-distribute the source, we require that you make it clear in the source that, although the code derived from Apple Sample Code,  you've since made changes to it.\
}