.\" $XConsortium: XF86Setup.man /main/3 1996/12/09 17:37:49 kaleb $
.\" $XFree86: xc/programs/Xserver/hw/xfree86/XF86Setup/XF86Setup.man,v 3.6 2002/10/12 16:06:43 herrb Exp $
.TH XF86Setup 1 __vendorversion__
.SH NAME
XF86Setup - Graphical configuration utility for XFree86
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B XF86Setup
[ -sync ] [ -name \fIappname\fP ] [ -nodialog ] [ -- \fIarg\fP ...]
.LP
.B XF86Setup
[ -sync ] [ -name \fIappname\fP ] [ -script ]
[ -display \fIdisplay\fP ] [ -geometry \fIgeometry\fP ]
\fIfilename\fP [ [ -- ] \fIarg\fP ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I XF86Setup
is normally used to either perform the initial setup of the XFree86
X servers or to make adjustments to the existing configuration.
.PP
When used to initially configure the XFree86 servers, it will
start the VGA 16 server and then allow configuration settings to be
entered.  Once that is completed the appropriate server for the
hardware will be started and the configuration settings will be
saved.
.PP
For a more complete description see the \fIQuick-Start Guide to
XFree86 Setup\fP.
.PP
When run from within an already running server environment (e.g.
from an xterm window),
.I XF86Setup
can be used to make adjustments to the current server configuration.
.PP
Note that when the existing XF86Config file is read, it is used to
set the default values for various settings, but the complete contents
of the existing file are not preserved.  For example, when the new
XF86Config file is written, it will \fInot\fP contain any additional
comment lines from the original file.
.PP
When a filename is specified, it is interpreted as a script file
containing Tcl/Tk commands to run.  If the filename contains a slash,
it is assumed that it specifies the path to the file to execute,
otherwise the file is searched for in the user's PATH, unless the
\fB-script\fP option is given, in which case, it is expected to
exist in the \fIscripts\fP subdirectory of the
\fIXF86Setup\fP library directory.
.PP
The result is entirely dependant on the contents of the file.

.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 14
.B -sync
Turn on synchronization for all communication with an X server.
.TP 14
.BI -name " appname"
Use \fIappname\fP as the window name.
.TP 14
.BI -display " display"
Specify the display to talk to.
.TP 14
.B -nodialog
Do not use the Dialog program for text mode user interaction.
Normally \fIXF86Setup\fP will use the Dialog program, if it is
found in the user's PATH, otherwise a simple text interface is used.
.TP 14
.BI -geometry " geomspec"
Specify the initial geometry for the window.
.TP 14
.BI -script
Look for the specified filename in the \fIscripts\fP directory,
instead of searching the user's PATH (if the filename doesn't
specify a path).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP 14
.B PATH
Used to search for the location of the Dialog program
.TP 14
.B XWINHOME
If set, indicates the parent directory of X bin and lib directories.
.TP 14
.B XF86SETUPLIB
If set, overrides the default location of the library directory
(normally __projectroot__/lib/X11/XF86Setup).
.TP 14
.B TMPDIR
Directory in which to store temporary files (defaults to /tmp)
.SH FILES
.I __projectroot__/lib/X11/XF86Config
.br
or
.I /etc/XF86Config
.RS 14
Can optionally be read to set default values
for configuration settings
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIQuick-Start Guide to XFree86 Setup\fP
.br
Xserver(1), XFree86(1), XF86Config(4/5), xvidtune(1), xdm(1),
xf86config(1), xinit(1), XF86Misc(3), XF86VidMode(3),
xmseconfig(1), dialog(1)
.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Joe Moss, \fIjoe@XFree86.org\fP
.SH BUGS
Does not support all possible configurations, for example,
graphics tablets must be configured by editing the XF86Config
file manually.
