=head1 NAME

XML::LibXML::Attr - XML::LibXML Attribute Class

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  $attr = XML::LibXML::Attr->new($name [,$value]);
  $string = $attr->getValue();
  $value = $attr->value;
  $attr->setValue( $string );
  $node = $attr->getOwnerElement();
  $attr->setNamespace($nsURI, $prefix);


=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is the interface to handle Attributes like ordinary nodes. The naming of
the class relies on the W3C DOM documentation.

=over 4

=item B<new>

  $attr = XML::LibXML::Attr->new($name [,$value]);

Class constructor. If you need to work with iso encoded strings, you should
always use the createAttrbute of XML::LibXML::Document.


=item B<getValue>

  $string = $attr->getValue();

Returns the value stored for the attribute. If undef is returned, the attribute
has no value, which is different of being not specified.



=back

=over 4

=item B<value>

  $value = $attr->value;

Alias for getValue()



=back

=over 4

=item B<setValue>

  $attr->setValue( $string );

This is needed to set a new attribute value. If iso encoded strings are passed
as parameter, the node has to be bound to a document, otherwise the encoding
might be done incorrectly.



=back

=over 4

=item B<getOwnerElement>

  $node = $attr->getOwnerElement();

returns the node the attribute belongs to. If the attribute is not bound to a
node, undef will be returned. Overwriting the underlying implementation, the
parentNode function will return undef, instead of the owner element.



=back

=over 4

=item B<setNamespace>

  $attr->setNamespace($nsURI, $prefix);

This function activates a namespace for the given attribute. If the attribute
was not previously declared in the context of the attribute this function will
be silently ignored. In this case you may wish to call setNamespace() on the
ownerElement.



=back

=head1 AUTHORS

Matt Sergeant, 
Christian Glahn, 
=head1 VERSION

1.58

=head1 COPYRIGHT

2001-2004, AxKit.com Ltd; 2002-2004 Christian Glahn, All rights reserved.

=cut
