.\""Copyright (c) 2001 Apple Computer, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
.\"The contents of this file constitute Original Code as defined in and are 
.\"subject to the Apple Public Source License Version 1.2 (the 'License'). 
.\"You may not use this file except in compliance with the
.\"License. Please obtain a copy of the License at 
.\"http://www.apple.com/publicsource and read it before using this file.
.\"
.\"This Original Code and all software distributed under the License are 
.\"distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER 
.\"EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE
.\"HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\"WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE,
.\"QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT. Please see the License for the 
.\"specific language governing rights and limitations under the License."
.Dd August 4, 2001
.Dt BOM 1
.Os Mac OS X
.Sh NAME
.Nm bom
.Nd bill of materials 
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Mac OS X Installer uses a file system "bill of materials" to determine which files to install, remove, or upgrade. A bill of materials, 
.Nm bom ,
contains all the files within a directory, along with some information about each file. File information includes: the file's UNIX permissions, its owner and group, its size, its time of last modification, and so on.  Also included are a checksum for each file and information about hard links.
.Pp
The bill of materials for a minimal Mac OS X system is stored in /System/Library/CoreServices/BaseSystem.bom.
.Nm Boms
for optional packages are found within the package receipts located in /Library/Receipts.
.Sh FILES
/System/Library/CoreServices/BaseSystem.bom -
.Nm 
for the required parts of Mac OS X
.Sh SEE ALSO 
.Xr ditto 8 , 
.Xr lsbom 8 ,
.Xr mkbom 8
.Sh BUGS 
Mac OS X's bill of materials format is not compatible with formats from older operating systems.
.Sh HISTORY
The bill of materials file appeared in NeXTSTEP to support installation. The file format was updated and extended for Mac OS X 10.0.

