.\" Id: dpsexec.man,v 6.1 1994/05/18 23:21:36 asente Exp $
.\" $XFree86: xc/programs/dpsexec/dpsexec.man,v 1.1 2001/03/01 01:23:58 dawes Exp $
.TH DPSEXEC 1 __vendorversion__
.SH NAME
dpsexec \- Display PostScript Executive

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dpsexec 
[
.B \-display \fIname\fR
][
.B \-sync
][
.B \-backup
][
.B \-noexec
][
.B \-root
][
.B \-drawable \fIwindowId\fR
][
.B \-height \fIn\fR
][
.B \-width \fIn\fR
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
.B dpsexec
is a Display PostScript program that
allows the user to interact directly with the PostScript 
interpreter through a command interface. 
.B dpsexec 
reads lines of text from standard input and passes each line to
the PostScript interpreter for execution.
It creates a window that displays the results of graphics operations as
they are executed.
.B dpsexec
exits when end of file is reached on standard input, or when
the user types "quit<return>", which executes
the PostScript 
.B quit
operator.
.LP
By default,
.B dpsexec
executes the PostScript
.B executive
operator before it accepts any user input.
This operator puts the PostScript interpreter in "interactive
executive" mode so that the user can control the interpreter
directly. 
In this mode, the PostScript interpreter supports certain line-editing 
functions and prompts the user when it is ready to execute more input.
See section 2.4.4, "Using the Interpreter Interactively,"
of the \fIPostScript Language Reference Manual, Second Edition,\fR
for detailed information on this mode of operation. 

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-display " name"
specifies the display on which to open a connection to the Display
PostScript system. If no display is specified, the 
DISPLAY environment variable is used.
.TP
.B \-sync
establishes a synchronous connection with the specified X display.
.TP
.B \-backup
uses backing store for the window in which graphics are
displayed, if possible.  This is generally only effective with
the DPS NX system.
.TP
.B \-noexec
prevents
.B dpsexec
from entering "interactive executive" mode.  The primary effect
of this option is to 
inhibit printing the
.B PS>
prompt before each line of input is accepted.
This option is useful when 
.B dpsexec
is run with standard input redirected from a file or a pipe.
.TP
.B \-root
tells
.B dpsexec
to draw into the root window instead of into a window that it creates.
.TP
.BI \-drawable " windowId"
tells
.B dpsexec
to draw into the specified window instead of into a window that it creates.
.TP
.BI \-height " n"
sets the height of the created window.
.TP
.BI \-width " n"
sets the width of the created window.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
PostScript language error messages are printed to standard output.

.SH AUTHOR
Adobe Systems Incorporated

.SH NOTES
PostScript and Display PostScript are trademarks
of Adobe Systems Incorporated which may be registered
in certain jurisdictions.

.LP
Copyright (c) 1990-1994 Adobe Systems Incorporated.  All rights reserved.

