.\"	$Id: jabberd.8,v 1.5 2005/02/05 02:32:48 cjalbert Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000-2005 Apple Computer, Inc., all rights reserved.
.\" Distributed only as part of Mac OS X Server
.\"/usr/share/misc/mdoc.template
.do mso www.tmac
.Dd February 4, 2005
.Dt jabberd 8 SMM
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME
.Nm jabberd ,
.Nm iChatServer
.Nd chat message server for xmpp clients
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl B | Fl D
.Op Fl c Ar path         \" [-c configuration file] 
.Op Fl H Ar dir          \" [-H home directory]
.Op Fl Z Ar zone Ns Op Ns , Ns ...
.Pp
.Nm
.Op Fl h | Fl v | Fl V
.Sh DESCRIPTION          \" Section Header - required - don't modify
The jabberd server is an open-source server implementation of the
Jabber protocol. It is used for deploying messaging services inside a
company or as a public IM service.
.Pp
.Nm
is typically launched at boot time under the control of
.Xr launchd 8 .
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width ".It Fl Z Ar zone Ns Op Ns , Ns ..."
.It Fl B
Run in the background.
.It Fl c Ar path                 \"-a flag as a list item
Define the relative or absolute path to the jabber.xml configuration file.
.It Fl D
Runs in foreground and displays debug information.
.It Fl H Ar dir
Define the relative or absolute path to the home directory.
.It Fl h
Print usage summary and exit.
.It Fl V , Fl v
Print build version and exit.
.It Fl Z Ar zone Ns Op Ns , Ns ...
Define a comma-separated list of zones to filter for debug output.
.El                      \" Ends the list
.Pp
.Sh FILES                \" File used or created by the topic of the man page
.Bl -ohang -width ".Pa /System/Library/LaunchDaemons/org.jabberstudio.jabberd.plist" -compact
.It Pa /etc/jabber/jabber.xml
.Bl -dash -offset indent -compact
.It
default configuration file
.El
.It Pa /usr/sbin/jabberd
.Bl -dash -offset indent -compact
.It
daemon
.El
.It Pa /var/jabberd/key.pem
.Bl -dash -offset indent -compact
.It
SSL certificate and key
.El
.It Pa /var/jabberd/run/jabber.pid
.Bl -dash -offset indent -compact
.It
daemon pid file
.El
.It Pa /System/Library/LaunchDaemons/org.jabberstudio.jabberd.plist
.Bl -dash -offset indent -compact
.It
.Xr launchd 8
configuration file.
.El
.El
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.URL http://jabberd.jabberstudio.org/1.4/doc/adminguide "Administration Guide"
.Pp
.URL http://jabberd.jabberstudio.org/1.4/doc/adminfaq "Administration FAQ"
.Pp
Other documentation can be found on-line at
.URL http://jabberd.jabberstudio.org/1.4/#docs "Jabberd 1.4 Documentation" .
.Pp
.Xr syslog.conf 5 ,
.Xr launchd 8 ,
.Xr syslogd 8
