.\" Copyright (c) 1985, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)floor.3	6.5 (Berkeley) 4/19/91
.\"	$Id: float.3,v 1.2 2003/08/17 20:36:46 scp Exp $
.\"
.Dd August 13, 2003
.Dt FLOAT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm float
.Nd functions with single-precision floating-point arguments
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The following functions are available in single precision. The functions conform to the
ISO/IEC 9899:1999(E) standard. They are similar to the corresponding double-precision
functions (which have the same name, without the "f" at the end). The double-precision
functions have their own pages. Wherever the double-precision functions use a double-precision
floating-point value (as an argument or return value), these functions use a single-precision
floating-point value.
.Pp
To use these functions you must add an additional flag to the link step that produces the
executable binary. Specify "-lmx".
.Pp
.Fn acosf
.Pp
.Fn acoshf
.Pp
.Fn asinf
.Pp
.Fn asinhf
.Pp
.Fn atanf
.Pp
.Fn atan2f
.Pp
.Fn atanhf
.Pp
.Fn cbrtf
.Pp
.Fn cosf
.Pp
.Fn coshf
.Pp
.Fn erff
.Pp
.Fn erfcf
.Pp
.Fn hypotf
.Pp
.Fn logf
.Pp
.Fn log2f
.Pp
.Fn log10f
.Pp
.Fn log1p
.Pp
.Fn powf
.Pp
.Fn sinf
.Pp
.Fn sinhf
.Pp
.Fn sqrtf
.Pp
.Fn tanf
.Pp
.Fn tanhf
.Pp
The following functions are also available in single precision. The 
functions conform to the ISO/IEC 9899:1999(E) standard. Each one has 
its own page, which it shares with its corresponding double-precision 
function (which has the same name, without the "f" on the end). The page 
can be found under both names.
.Pp
You do not need to specify the "-lmx" flag to use these functions.
.Pp
.Fn ceilf
.Pp
.Fn copysignf
.Pp
.Fn expf
.Pp
.Fn exp2f
.Pp
.Fn expm1f
.Pp
.Fn fabsf
.Pp
.Fn fdimf
.Pp
.Fn floorf
.Pp
.Fn fmaf
.Pp
.Fn fmaxf
.Pp
.Fn fminf
.Pp
.Fn fmodf
.Pp
.Fn frexpf
.Pp
.Fn ilogbf
.Pp
.Fn ldexpf
.Pp
.Fn lgammaf
.Pp
.Fn llrintf
.Pp
.Fn llroundf
.Pp
.Fn logbf
.Pp
.Fn lrintf
.Pp
.Fn lround
.Pp
.Fn modff
.Pp
.Fn nanf
.Pp
.Fn nextafterf
.Pp
.Fn remainderf
.Pp
.Fn remquof
.Pp
.Fn rintf
.Pp
.Fn roundf
.Pp
.Fn scalblnf
.Pp
.Fn scalbnf
.Pp
.Fn tgammaf
.Pp
.Fn truncf
